Tuesday 3 June 2014 08.59 EDT	Guardian Weekly Letters, 6 June 2014	Monarchy and democracy; alienating our children; death of the novel	The analysis of Thai politics in your leader (Waiting for democracy, 30 May) is, as far as it goes, spot on. But it does not go far enough. While noting the incomplete democratic revolution of 1932 and the place of the royal court in the "old" establishment democratically overthrown by Thaksin Shinawatra, it underplays the decades-long campaign by the king, Bhumibol Adulyadej, to recoup power for the monarchy.; Paul M Handley (in The King Never Smiles: A Biography of Thailand's Bhumibol Adulyadej) observed: "[r]ather than accepting his position as simply a benign cultural object like the modern Japanese or British monarchs, Bhumibol made himself a full-fledged, dominant political actor".; Reviewing Handley's book for the New York Review of Books, Ian Buruma commented: "Bhumibol has never had much time for elected politicians, whom he tends to denigrate as selfish, venal and divisive. Tough military men and loyal bureaucrats are more congenial to his vision of unity, order and harmony under the wise, selfless, and virtuous monarch".; Buruma is too kind. A revanchist monarchy is the central impediment to democracy in Thailand. It is probably too much to expect a religious people like the Thais to accept Denis Diderot's advice that "Men will never be free until the last king is strangled with the entrails of the last priest." But there will be no democracy in Thailand until the monarchy is abolished. Geoff Mullen Sydney, Australia; Alex Renton's indictment of prep and public boarding school (23 May) will have rung bells for a lot of old inmates. And (unlike your Guardian Weekly headline, The abusers could still be teaching) he's wise not to make too much of the physical cruelty and sexual abuse entailed. What does more damage is the routine alienation of young children from family and community, and the systematic substitution of formal hierarchy, models and discipline for the intimate interaction of home life.; For working-class families, to have a child taken into care has been a proof of failure; for certain middle-class families, it's still proof of success, and a prudent investment in future success – however partial – as emotion and energy are diverted to competitive performance.; I blame the middle-class parents. If not my own, then theirs who brought them up unable or unwilling to care for us, or trust any common humanity beyond their class. I can't say I suffered much at school, but by the end of each school holiday I felt the cold and darkness creeping in. When the school train pulled away, the tears may have been in my parents' eyes, not mine.; Not every painful separation is avoidable. We all know about cutting the cord. But who asks what happens at the other end of the cord, inside the baby? Could that be where a lot of later emotion comes home to roost, as subsequent partings and losses flit back to the old grand central station, onetime source of everything? Greg Wilkinson Swansea, UK; I enjoyed Aditya Chakrabortty's article on the state of university economics departments (16 May). I am encouraged to hear that current students are demanding that they be taught rather than indoctrinated. Perhaps the problem is that these economics schools are being considered in the wrong light.; As any liberal arts professor might suggest, let's start by "unpacking" the institution's title: while a "school of economics" is clearly economic for the university, the "school" part has obviously been read in the wrong context. Instead of being a place of learning and open debate, please think of these institutions instead as large groups of cold-blooded vertebrates moving in unison to find food and protect themselves from perceived threats.; This type of "school" is better used for studying the biology of complex human systems or as economics case studies themselves – how they are used by universities to collect revenue or "food" from students, alumni and corporate partners, and how their policies move according to shifting currents rather than better understanding.; Only rarely should these "schools" be thought of as a part of a university's attempts to be a source of enlightenment. Dave Scott Toronto, Canada; • Aditya Chakraborrty's statement that "mainstream economists are liberal in theory but can be [sic] authoritarian in practice", just misses the crux of the issue: namely, the impact of peer review. That practice may well be beneficial in physics or chemistry but, in other disciplines, it is the weapon by which a senior tenured faculty ensures that young aspirants cannot rock the academic boat – even where the ship is run by fools! Philip Stigger Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada; Yet another dire prediction that books, especially novels, are doomed (23 May). And yet another reference to Marshall McLuhan, who apparently predicted the advent of the books' nemesis, the internet, as the inevitable result of the broadcast technology that existed in his time.; In any case, Will Self laments the possible loss of his livelihood as a novelist, and predicts that students expecting to follow in his footsteps will be swallowed whole into the swamp of unread theses, coming up for air only to teach others like themselves who will face the same fate. Such, as Self says, is the inevitable follow-up to "a self-perpetuating and self-financing literary set-aside scheme to accommodate writers who can no longer make a living from their work".; Self ignores the fact that there are vast numbers of non-writers who still buy novels, and who consider it one of life's greatest pleasures to lounge comfortably with a good hardcover book. I have no idea whether the invention of the telephone was considered the work of the devil, but it made us more conversant. By the same token, books in any form are living messages from writers to whom we can still respond. Richard Orlando Westmount, Quebec, Canada; While I agree with Simon Jenkins (23 May) that coal power must go, I think he could do with having a better look at the energy sector. Oil, gas and nuclear all receive (very) large subsidy, and add to the problem of climate change. The renewable issue is mostly with their intermittent nature.; The solution is clearly development of distributed-energy storage, which would enable us to avoid the use of coal as the back-up power source. I find the idea of using neighbourhood-scale hydrogen power very compelling – the hydrogen can be produced by renewable energy and then used to fill the gaps from the renewable supply.; The answer to the climate problem is going to need new ideas to fix it – relying on slightly different mixes of old ones is sure to fail. Rohan Chadwick Bristol, UK; • I largely agree with Simon Jenkins's prescription to focus more on gas and nuclear power to reduce coal use. Yet, in discounting solar and wind power, he missed the big picture. While it is true that coal dependency is rising in Germany and electricity is costly due to high use of solar and wind power, the investment made in creating a market for these technologies has brought down costs dramatically over the past 10 years – with an eight-fold reduction for solar. The rest of the world benefits. Solar and wind power need to be part of the global solution to climate change. Phil Napier-Moore Bangkok, Thailand; • It shouldn't surprise your writer that since the US has interfered with elected governments in Egypt and Ukraine, the Iranians think they may be next (23 May). They remember that their elected prime minister, Mohammad Mossadegh, was overthrown in 1953 in a coup that the US bragged about. In the 1980s, the US contributed money, weapons and intelligence toward invading Iraq during a war that cost hundreds of thousands of casualties. Why wouldn't they be cautious? Patricia Clarke Toronto, Canada; • Many Canadians would agree with Saeed Kamali Dehghan on Why Canada is so wrong about Iran (23 May) – but again, please, it's the Stephen Harper government, not "Canada". Julia Fortin Courtenay, British Columbia, Canada; Please send letters to weekly.letters@theguardian.com
