Friday 24 January 2014 08.32 EST	Rapture, Blister, Burn – review	Hampstead theatre, London A grad-school reunion in New England raises pertinent questions about the role of women – and draws disappointing conclusions	Gina Gionfriddo's Becky Shaw, seen at the Almeida in 2011, was an acerbic American comedy about power and manipulation among the middle classes. Now, in this new play, Gionfriddo boldly tackles gender politics in the modern world. But, although the play offers an interesting potted history of postwar feminism, the social stratum it deals with is too narrow for the play to offer any telling conclusions.; The setting is a New England town where we witness an edgy reunion between three former grad-school friends now in their early 40s. Catherine, who has come home to look after her dying mum, is the high-flier, an academic superstar and media darling who writes books linking internet pornography with 9/11. In contrast, her old chum, Gwen, is a stay-at-home mum uneasily married to Don, who was once Catherine's lover and intellectual rival, but who has now settled for second best as a junior dean at a liberal arts college.; The stage is set for a debate about who is happier – Catherine or Gwen – and even a possible role-swap, as witnessed by a bright 21-year-old, Avery, who is a beneficiary of the women's movement. The problem is that Gionfriddo presents us with a series of false antitheses: either, she suggests, women become childless careerists like Catherine, or discontented homemakers like Gwen. Whenever the idea is mooted that women might combine career and family, it is quickly squashed; and, even though Avery is meant to represent the new woman, she too learns that liberation exacts its price.; But you can't build a convincing argument from such a limited sample, and the play veers off into improbability when its two female leads change places. I enjoyed the show most when it was at its least dramatic, as Catherine conducted a seminar exploring the ideas of Betty Friedan, who argues that not all women fit one mould, and Phyllis Schlafly, who believes that marriage and civilisation are inextricably linked. Theory, for once, proves more interesting than practice.; Peter DuBois directs the piece capably and there are good performances all round. Emilia Fox even made me believe momentarily in the naive Catherine, Emma Fielding looks suitably careworn as the domesticated Gwen and Shannon Tarbet shines brightly as the precocious Avery. While the play asks pertinent questions about the dilemmas confronting women, however, it seems dismally reactionary in its conclusion that public fulfilment and private happiness are irreconcilable.; • Did you catch this show – or any other recently? Tell us about it using #gdnreview
