Thursday 11 April 2013 08.30 EDT	Should we care that US universities are 'too liberal'?	America's top universities seem to offer everything except conservative views. That's not healthy for political debate	By and large, you can tell a person's political persuasion in America just by knowing their preferred news sources. Are they a Fox News or Wall Street Journal kind of person? Or a New York Times and MSNBC type? The same distinction is increasingly occurring at US universities.; There are "conservative schools", often with religious affiliations or in parts of the country that are solidly right of center, and then there are "liberal ones", often in the northeast, California and major metropolitan areas and often dubbed "elite" schools. Universities don't like to classify themselves politically. Many of the nation's top colleges promote their openness to intellectual debate and varied viewpoints. It's the right ideal, but in practice, it doesn't always play out.; Take Princeton University, one of the Ivy League schools. According to an analysis by the university's newspaper, only one faculty member and a janitor donated to Mitt Romney's 2012 campaign. The other $169,000 in faculty donations went to President Obama.; At Bowdoin College, one of America's top liberal arts colleges, 100% of faculty donations went to Obama in last year's campaign. Campaign donations – or even voter registration data – aren't the final say on whether a university has a certain political slant, but it is food for thought about how welcome views across the political spectrum are to a campus.; "It is very difficult to maintain and environment of openness without frequent exposure to competing ideas. Progressive ideas are not likely to be subjected to serious challenges unless there are conservative around (The reverse would be just as true)," argues Peter Wood, president of the National Association of Scholars and author of the new report "What does Bowdoin Teach?" The study takes a deep look at the college, its curriculum and culture after Bowdoin's president made a point of calling on the campus community to be open and tolerant of different perspectives, including those of conservatives.; There's plenty to quibble with in the report, but the basic premise is that Bowdoin and many other top-tier schools believe they are campus communities that welcome debate, yet they have conscious and subconscious biases that hinder it. The Bowdoin study is one of many such analyses, including a book out this month: Why Are Professors Liberal and Why Do Conservatives Care?; Why should we care? Because the whole point of the American university system is not just to train students for a job, but to challenge their notions of who they are and what they know. Colleges want students of different races, religions and socio-economic backgrounds to engage with one another. They also want students to debate each other on current events and politics. But without diverse voices, that's a hard task as the Seattle Times chronicled on the University of Washington campus during the 2012 election.; There are those who argue that politics has no place in many courses and that a great professor should be able to teach material without any bias or, at least, present views that might not be his or her own. There's a case to be made for that kind of teaching. Gregory Mankiw, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors under President George W Bush and an adviser to Mitt Romney's campaign, chairs Harvard University's economics department. In an email, he said he does his best to keep politics out of his introductory economics course.; Often, though, subconscious biases filter into faculty hiring, the types of courses that are even offered at a school and the textbooks and articles students are assigned to read. Even in the medical field, which would seem to be as objective as possible, these prejudices can creep in. As Sally Satel, a psychiatrist who lectured at Yale University and is author of PC, MD How Political Correctness is Corrupting Medicine, puts it:; The other problem is that when there are few conservative faculty members and students on campus (or few liberals at a religious institution), there's a limited perception of what "the right" is. Republican views get reduced to the stereotypical extremes of Rush Limbaugh or Phyllis Schlafly.; Contrary to what you might expect, however, students themselves seem to want a more diverse range of views. Jonathan Imber, a professor at Wellesley College in the Boston area, teaches a sociology course on the history of conservatism. He begins by noting that he is a registered Republican, but he is not trying to indoctrinate anyone. After the course, many students, including self-identified Democrats and liberals, thank him. Students are "hungry for intellectual diversity", Imber says.; The first step is recognizing there is a problem on many college campuses. The ideal isn't 50/50, but universities should want an environment where there's enough of a "minority" that the campus community can have solid debates. This inevitably leads to jokes about some sort of affirmative action for Republicans (or for progressive at conservative schools), but Peter Wood puts it this way:; We want better dialogue in our country. We want compromise not to be a bad word. We wonder why it seems so hard for the two sides to simply talk to one another beyond soundbites.; But the reality is Americans grow up in communities that slant one way or another politically. We attend schools and universities that have heavy biases and we watch media that push certain views.; Where are we going to learn to mingle and debate in a respectful and intelligent forum if we can't even do it at most universities?
