Friday 4 January 2013 17.55 EST	The Royal Academy: a history of sulks and squabbles	The Royal Academy's first annual exhibition in 1769 (entrance charge one shilling, to keep out the riff-raff) marked the birth of a public interest in new art. But there were many fights over the founding of this august institution	Visit the Royal Academy in London and you pass the 20th-century statue of its first president, Sir Joshua Reynolds, standing in the courtyard in front of its entrance. Palette in hand, the bewigged and frock-coated artist is a knight of the realm as well as a portraitist in action. He is the representative of a confident age. The Discourses that he wrote in his office of president are often treated by art historians as the artistic code of a ruling class that knew its aesthetic values. Yet, as Charles Saumarez Smith's new book shows, the Academy he headed was born of rivalry and resentment, amid some confusion and much bickering.; Saumarez Smith, the present chief executive of the Royal Academy, has raked through his institution's archives for the story of those squabbles. A Society of Artists, founded one heady evening at the Turk's Head tavern in Soho, had been set up by ambitious artists to promote an annual exhibition of their wares. The first of these, in 1760, was a huge success, revealing the lively interest of a genteel public in new art. A rival Free Society of Artists was set up by artists with a radical bent, with Hogarth their secular saint. Meanwhile a faction with grander ambitions, whose prime mover was the leading architect William Chambers, split off from the society and turned to the young George III for support. They wanted something altogether more elite.; As the nascent Academy struggles into being, Saumarez Smith follows the bureaucratic manoeuvres almost day by day (the dates are marked in the book's margins). "Much of what was discussed consisted of boring, but necessary, attention to due process," and the author replicates the many clauses and subclauses by which these enthusiastic would-be bureaucrats regulated their artistic activities. From the first they anticipated conflicts, specifying elaborate procedures for penalising every form of inappropriate behaviour. The fight over the founding of the institution is entertaining enough, with leading players such as Reynolds and Chambers professing grand ideals while driven by vanity and pique. They were right to suppose that the king would take an interest and supply funding: the fledgling institution appealed strongly to his sense of national self-importance. Academies existed in Italy, the Netherlands and France – why not in London, thriving capital of a nation that, since a series of triumphs in imperial wars, now considered itself Europe's top dog? The capital's wealth was bringing accomplished artists from all over Europe, and the consumption of culture was becoming the best way to display your gentility.; The sketches of the 36 founding members are tantalising, revealing not just the conventional Georgian portraitists you might expect, but a high proportion of immigrants, especially from Italy, who had arrived to live off Europe's most dynamic artistic marketplace. Their collective energy is preserved in Johan Zoffany's group portrait of the academicians completed in 1772 and exhibited at the annual exhibition that year. Gathered in a semi-circle around two naked male models, these Enlightenment gentlemen (the two female founding members of the Academy are not depicted [see footnote]) fancy themselves arbiters of taste, but Zoffany has slyly made them an assembly of posers and eccentrics. Recognisable artists, you might say.; A couple of years after the Academy was founded, George III gave it Somerset House, a then dilapidated royal palace (it would be a century before it moved into its present premises at Burlington House in Piccadilly). The king loathed Reynolds, but duly knighted him for giving gravitas to his pet project. Reynolds, meanwhile, had hoped that his Academy would become a repository for old masters, from which its members would drink in the proper visual principles of art. This was not to be, but it did become a school of drawing both from life and from plaster casts of the antique. One of the attractions was the provision of life models of both sexes, now a respectable feature of a royal institution. The Royal Schools (as the founding members styled their training college) took in not students so much as up-and-coming painters, some in their 30s. Saumarez Smith's capsule sketches of these ambitious young men lets us glimpse aspirant artists who were not born to ease – the sons of a brewer, a Hungarian trumpeter and a sausage maker – and were jostling for advancement in the mart of Georgian London.; One dark oil by Elias Martin shows students appropriately dwarfed by classical torsos in the Cast Room. "My thoughts day and night run on nothing but the antique," wrote James Barry. The highest status was given to so-called "history painting". Painters such as Barry, or another founding academician Benjamin West, commanded admiration for huge, morally elevating canvases depicting clinching episodes of classical or biblical narrative. Their work showed that painting was not merely a manual skill, but one of the liberal arts. The Royal Academy's first annual exhibition opened in April 1769, with entry charged at one shilling (just enough to keep out the riff-raff). It soon became an important event in London's social calendar. As Saumarez Smith observes, it marked the birth of a public interest in contemporary art, as opposed to the old masters that men and women of taste were supposed to revere. At the King's command, the starring work at the first exhibition was West's The Departure of Regulus, a huge history painting depicting, in a frigidly grand manner, the self-sacrifice of a noble Roman. Destined for a longer life were the Reynolds portraits of actors and aristocrats that accompanied this inert artifact. In his annual lectures, Reynolds espoused his culture's official faith in history painting. As a practitioner, he deployed his formidable skills to become the most accomplished portraitist of the age.; Saumarez Smith claims that he well recognises the squabbles and sulks when artists found that their paintings had not been hung in the positions they would wish. Sadly without illustrative anecdotes, he tells us that academicians still "mind passionately where their works are hung, because this is a visible manifestation of their standing among their peers". Indeed, he concludes by celebrating the "deeply disputatious" tendencies of present-day members of the Royal Academy, prone to the "brutal" (his word) working-out of their disagreements. This is the proper inheritance of the Age of Enlightenment. With his own evident belief in civilised sociability, and the salving power of the annual dinner of academicians, Saumarez Smith writes as something of an 18th-century gent himself.; John Mullan is professor of English at University College London.; • This footnote was appended on 16 January 2013: The two female founding members of the Academy are indeed depicted. They do not appear in person in the painting, since the occasion is presented as a life class with two naked male models, to which women were not allowed. Angelica Kauffman and Mary Moser do, however, appear in portraits within Zoffany's Portraits of the Academicians of the Royal Academy, on the right hand wall.
