Thursday 24 October 2013 02.30 EDT	Boot up: Apple's patent win, Gmail v Mavericks, Google's banner ads, and more	Plus the illicit torrent business, Microsoft PR on iWork, RM exits PCs, Apple's missing story and more	A burst of 9 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team; Wouldn't be sure about that; earlier licencees include Samsung and Ericsson. Wi-Lan's only revenues are from its patents: $19.9m in the second quarter. Nice business if you can get it.; Joe Kissell:; Very poorly documented by Apple. If you rely on Gmail in Mail, the advice seems to be: don't upgrade.; Farhad Majoo argues that because Google wants to get everyone online all the time, it wants to use Motorola to drive down the average price of Apple's and Samsung's smartphones:; It's a great theory apart from the fact that there's absolutely no way that Motorola could ever get the scale necessary to have the slightest impact on Apple. And as for affecting Samsung - forget it. The $13bn mystery of what Motorola is "for" continues.; Interesting ratios of screen makers there. No word on how many iPad minis (of both hues) it expects to make.; Frank X Shaw, head of Microsoft PR:; It's the affiliate schemes which make it work for people like 'John'.; Banner ads on Google results? Danny Sullivan points out that Google "promised" in 2005 that it would never do this: "There will be no banner ads on the Google homepage or web search results pages. There will not be crazy, flashy, graphical doodads flying and popping up all over the Google site. Ever." It's now doing precisely that with as many as 30 advertisers.; Brutal.; Ben Thompson (who has worked at Apple) tries to put his finger on the essence that's missing from Apple's presentation - and, he wonders, perhaps its internal thinking:; As he points out, the human stories were missing from the iPad presentations in favour of many speeds and feeds. He thinks Scott Forstall embodied Jobs's thinking better. That may be true. When Jobs wasn't the chief executive, he got fired from Apple too.; You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard; To suggest a link, either add it below or tag it with @gdntech on the free Delicious service.
