Monday 23 December 2013 07.30 EST	Sorry marriage traditionalists, young people shouldn't rush to the altar	Old views prioritise finding a spouse. But couples who focus on educational and professional development first are happiest	Do conservatives think young men are wayward children, needing women to manipulate and direct them into decent behavior? That's New York Times columnist Ross Douthat's opinion, at least, and he chalks it up to traditional values. On that point, he's not wrong: traditional values do situate young men simultaneously as future patriarchs and foolish chumps needing the allegedly more moral, family-centric female to civilize them. Douthat's argument is about as offensive to women as his usual writing – which is to say, very – but men, you should take note also: a retreat to strict gender roles insults you, too.; Douthat relies on a study that pulls 20-year-old data to argue that parents of daughters are more likely to vote Republican. Perhaps he's right, and maybe when I was 9 my parents were voting for George Bush Sr and enjoying Nirvana live in concert. That doesn't say much about how parents with daughters vote today. He would also like you to know that he reads books (or read at least a book) and knows Brooklyn is cool. Relying on Adelle Waldman's "The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P" as evidence of the trouble with men, Douthat argues that the protagonist Nate's problem isn't that he's vaguely misogynist, indecisive, romantically meandering and a poor communicator; it's that women willingly have sex with him, which enables his behavior.; In Douthat's estimation, women in their late 20s and early 30s want marriage and babies, stat – even in cool-guy Brooklyn. Since guys like Nate are on a longer biological timeline, they don't have to commit to women their own age while those women's eggs are still ripe. Instead, they're free to remain romantically non-committal, loosely irresponsible and perpetually adolescent, to the profound annoyance of the women they date. Douthat's solution: women shouldn't sleep with men unless there's a higher level of commitment, ideally leading to marriage. This ties back to the daughters/Republicans study, Douthat says, because it's also what Republican-voting parents think their daughters should do. Implied is the fact that the Republican party tries to legislate those conservative ideals, and parents – apparently unable to legally affix chastity belts to their female offspring – at least support a political party that makes the non-traditional female life more difficult and perilous.; Douthat's liberal arts Lysistrata has several major flaws, the most obvious of which is that women like sex. I can't blame Douthat if his own personal experience says otherwise – I can't imagine many of us, even those who he might describe as a "chubby Reese Witherspoon", feel particularly turned on by a guy who clearly dislikes us, especially when we have the nerve to tell him we don't want him to impregnate us during a drunken hook-up – but I assure Douthat, most women don't want to wait until marriage to have sex.; We're also not so desperate that we want to marry just anyone. Underlying Douthat's thesis and the teeth-gnashing of so many conservative critics is the assumption that we all want to marry any guy we sleep with, hook up with or even date. In fact, many of us enjoy the time we spend with the Nates of the world but can't actually imagine waking up next to that face every day for the rest of our lives. We have more specific requirements for a mate than "lives in my same borough, has sex with me, sometimes texts back". And, at least in the privileged and rarified creative outer-borough classes Douthat describes, women are doing exceptionally well.; It's in "real America" that women and men are struggling. Across large swaths of the GOP-voting country, marriage rates are down and divorce is up – not because radical feminism has succeeded in convincing the whole heartland to go Murphy Brown – but because repressive traditional gender roles have screwed over a lot of men in an age of global capitalism.; In communities of color enormous numbers of men are incarcerated in the largest prison system in the history of the world – a system that is increasingly privatized, making billions for large corporations. They're not only leaving behind families, but upon release, often find it nearly impossible to get the kind of decent work that would enable them to support a family. Blue-collar men regardless of race are similarly unable to count on the well-paying union jobs their fathers held, as manufacturing goes off-shore and right-wing policies gut workers' rights and organizing abilities.; Women too suffer in this new economy, as low-wage female-dominated fields are notoriously difficult, exploitative and dead-end. An emphasis on traditional marriage and gender roles doesn't help. An unemployed and depressed husband isn't a boon to the family unit; the implication that an unmarried working mom is failing her children or a mom on welfare is a social drain neglects to take into account that many of those women are doing the best possible thing for their children, and are rewarded with political demonization and disrespect.; Definitions of manhood and masculinity vary among racial, regional, religious and social groups in the United States, but one quality that permeates nearly all of them is the ability to serve as a family's primary breadwinner. Feminists want to challenge that model, and emphasize that a man's worth is more than his wallet. Traditionalists and conservatives reify it, but then promote the very policies that make it impossible for working-class men and women to achieve financial stability and self-sufficiency.; But in the Brooklyn Douthat is so worried about, women face many challenges but also have extraordinarily good fortune. As Ann Friedman points out in New York Magazine, many young women in Nate's social tribe spend their 20s working hard to set themselves up for a manageable professional and personal life later on. Men and dating are fun, and sometimes sources of heartache or stress, but marriage isn't the number one goal. And even our supposedly Republican-voting parents aren't typically encouraging us to tie the knot before 30. Who do you think told us to work so hard in school and achieve so highly?; Men, too, are not as universally useless as Douthat describes Nathaniel P. Lots of young men are spending their 20s and early 30s in the same way as young women: prioritizing work, building a wide social network and enjoying life. Why, exactly, is it ideal for everyone to settle down in the suburbs and reproduce early? Americans who are financially stable easily live into their 80s and 90s now. Why the hurry to get a jump on what will, if all goes well, be a 60-year-long relationship?; While young men may not be chomping at the bit to marry at 25, many of them are nonetheless conscientious, emotionally competent and present partners. And some of them aren't – just like young women. After all, neither women nor men are born knowing exactly what they want in a relationship and how to build strong romantic bonds. There's a learning curve there. And it seems those who study it longer by marrying in their late 20s, 30s or beyond have stronger, longer-lasting marriages.; So do those people who are highly educated when they marry and individually able to support themselves. The sort of freedom that self-sufficiency brings to a marriage can strengthen it – it's a choice, entered into because two people are committing to build a unique social and legal relationship premised on mutual respect, love and a shared life vision. The Douthat-approved model is marriage as a unit of transactional economics, where women get financial security from a male partner and a male partner gets sex and someone to take care of his home life.; Under the traditional marriage model, it makes sense to withhold sex until the Nathaniel Ps of the world will marry you. Under the modern model, though, women can ask themselves: Why would I want to marry this Nate character anyway?; In reality, the Nathaniel Ps and the over-educated Hannah Horvaths he dates are doing pretty well. Highly-educated later-than-average brides and grooms not only have the lowest divorce rates of any other group, but women with college degrees are more likely to marry than their less-educated peers. Couples in gender-egalitarian marriages also report higher levels of happiness than their more conservative peers. It seems that all those Women's Studies grads are actually doing better in the romance department than the more traditional women men like Douthat would like us to emulate.; That might be because, contrary to our reputation, most feminist women actually like men. As far as I can tell, we like them a lot more than your average Republican does. We like them so much we treat them like human beings, not financial support systems or dim-witted animals needing to be controlled. We believe they're just as capable as women at being thoughtful, emotional, compassionate, kind and committed. And women are just as capable as men of being selfish, bullish, immature, aggressive and irresponsible.; We also know that both men and women are culturally conditioned to act in certain ways, and to see the other as somehow opposite. And so we push back on certain manifestations of culturally-constructed masculinity: the male-as-breadwinner model, sexual aggression and violence, presumptions of male authority and dominance. We keep pushing because we know men are complex, multi-faceted individuals who deserve freedom from all the ways our culture confines us based on gender. And so do women.; Douthat and conservatives like him don't seem to believe men to be complex at all. They seem to think that men fundamentally dislike women, and need to be sexually and socially coerced into pairing with one in any way that's more committed than intercourse.; Perhaps that says more about them than it does about men, 30-something single Brooklynites, or even our Republican-voting parents.

