Friday 26 April 2013 04.01 EDT	Nia Keturah (No 1,501)	Washington DC rapper offers a blurrily beautiful vision of societal hell to match Kendrick Lamar's	Hometown: Washington DC. The lineup: Nia Keturah (vocals).; The background: Woozy does it. There is currently a wave of female MCs and singers doing what the likes of Kendrick Lamar have been doing for a couple of years: making stunned, stoned experimental hip-hop and R&B, rapping from within a cloud of fogged-out samples and production that appears to have not so much been created via a studio console but exhaled by a laptop in one big puff of smoke. Like Lamar's good kid, m.A.A.d city, Nia Keturah's mixtape Po Lil Black Girl is "conscious" without feeling preachy, featuring a series of murky missives and message-songs with a moral dimension that give you more than a glimpse of the dark side. She's Angel Haze with less of the angel and more of the haze.; Reading on mobile? Click here to listen Keturah is keeping it ethereal on Po Lil Black Girl. A follow-up to her 7 Volume One and the Missed Education of Denise Huxtable mixtapes, it's an album that follows the travails of three women - Diamond, Mercedes and Paris - who decide to rob their neighbourhood "trap house" (crack house). Along the way we hear Keturah explore a range of issues about society and family without, as we say, sounding holier than thou. In a way, the former student of famous Atlantan black female liberal arts college Spelman is having her cake and eating it. She's a little bit "bougie" (an apocopation of "bourgie") while also showing an awareness of developments in "ratchet" (a loud/crass/dumb strain of rap).; Hilariously, she calls what she does "conscious ratchet", and you'll appreciate it if you like the idea of an Erykah Badu or Lauryn Hill type worldview filtered through a gaseous, billowing production and delivered by an artist with a voice that veers perilously or deliciously (depending on your opinion) close to Macy Gray's soulful squeak. The result – aided by various producers and rappers – is striking but understated: pointedly, one of the tracks samples Sade, and like Ms Adu's Keturah's music is deceptively easy on the ear. Or should we say queasy? This is the murkiest muzak, more viscous than vicious, a dream you might wake up from with a scream. Blunted and enchanted, to paraphrase notorious '90s rapper Stephen Malkmus.; The buzz: "Keturah has an undeniably unique voice in 2013, with sounds rivaling that of Macy Gray and Erykah Badu."; The truth: She's the soporific lil black girl.; Most likely to: Appeal to fans of Kendrick.; Least likely to: Appeal to fans of Hendrix.; What to buy: The Po Lil Black Girl mixtape is available now on her bandcamp. File next to: SZA, Jhené Aiko, Angel Haze, Kendrick Lamar.; Links: http://www.niaketurah.com; Monday's new band: Josh Record.
