4/9/2013	Facebook COO's 'Lean In' spurs women's leadership gatherings	Lean in alone, and you might fall on your face. Lean into a small circle of supporters, and you'll prop each other up.;That's the lesson that tech entrepreneur Gina Bianchini learned from her Cupertino, Calif., field hockey team, her Stanford roommates and her Goldman Sachs analyst class.;So she offered her friendship when Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook Inc.'s chief operating officer, arrived at the social network. And when Sandberg dreamed of a book, Bianchini matched it with her own idea: an online women's leadership program, crafted around social circles.;Together they've co-founded the nonprofit website LeanIn.Org.;There's power in small groups, meeting around shared goals so you reach your full potential," said Bianchini, 40, founder and chief executive of Mightybell, which creates online communities around shared interests. "If you are going to do something that terrifies you, first find a group," she said.;Their concept of Lean In Circles takes up where Sandberg's new book "Lean In" leaves off -- guiding the gathering of women to study and discuss issues such as professional risk-taking, assertiveness, networking and how to find a good balance between work and life. All profits of the book go toward funding the LeanIn.Org website and its interactive community.;They are no mere book club-like living room soirees: The Lean In Circle project is built upon the prestigious Voice & Influence curriculum of Stanford's Clayman Institute for Gender Research. Enrollment in the Clayman program has been restricted to top managers and Stanford faculty, but now it's available free at LeanIn.Org, with advice about negotiation tactics, overcoming stereotypes and how to influence colleagues. About 150 companies, including Cisco Systems Inc. and the nonprofit Dress for Success, are distributing the materials to employees.;At Stanford, the circle built by the Voice & Influence program was small because it could accommodate only 20 top-level managers and faculty a year, said Lori Nishiura Mackenzie, 47, associate director of the Clayman Institute. "Now we're empowering so many more people," she said.;Chris Bourg is leading one of LeanIn.Org's first circles with women who work with her at Stanford Library.;I see so many women -- really competent, really talented, really creative women -- who are hesitant to step forward," said Bourg, 47, who manages all of Stanford's humanities and social sciences libraries. "I want them to succeed. I want them to have a seat at the table. I want them to learn from each other's experiences.;Bourg and the 11 other members met for the first time recently and quickly agreed on three goals: to build a supportive network of trusted colleagues, to learn from each other and the curriculum, and to develop greater confidence in their skills and talents.;It so clearly captures a need," she said. "It almost doesn't matter whether you buy every bit of Sheryl's advice, hook, line and sinker. To tell each other stories is so powerful. Very gratifying.;There's now a wait list for a new group.;The five 20-minute videos and accompanying discussion guides feature three professors from Stanford's Graduate School of Business: Jennifer Aaker on using stories to advance your ideas, Deborah Gruenfeld on gaining power and influence, and Margaret Neale on negotiating to get a good deal. In a fourth, sociology professor Shelley Correll talks about overcoming stereotypes. And University of Virginia's Darden School professor Melissa Thomas-Hunt discusses team dynamics.;We've built a launching pad for a sustained conversation around how to lean into your ambitions," Bianchini said.;--;Krieger writes for the San Jose Mercury News/ McClatchy.;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: GINA BIANCHINI, above, co-founded LeanIn.org with Facebook's Sheryl Sandberg., PHOTOGRAPHER:LeanIn.org
