4/24/2013	LETTERS;Try driving smarter	Re "A tax everyone can love," Opinion, April 21;If folks are leery of paying taxes to cover the actual costs of burning oil, there are two things they can do to mitigate the effects of the carbon tax that Doyle McManus discusses in his column.;To start, our national fleet of vehicles is grossly inefficient. In 2012, the average fuel economy for new cars sold in the U.S. was about 24 miles per gallon. This problem is compounded by inefficient driving -- hard accelerations, speeding and accelerating toward a stop rather than coasting. As much as 30% of fuel is wasted as a result.;A carbon tax would be paid mostly by those who insisted on driving inefficient vehicles or who drove inefficiently. Smart drivers would migrate to efficient vehicles and would learn to drive them efficiently. Those drivers would be less affected by a tax increase.;Paul Scott;Santa Monica;A lot of people think the revenue-neutral carbon tax would be a tax on citizens, of course, we don't want more of that. But it's really a fee that the obscenely profitable polluters would have to pay for the carbon dioxide they release into our atmosphere when their fuels are burned.;The idea is that all of that revenue would come back to us as a "dividend," so some call this a "fee and dividend" rather than a tax. It would help mitigate the increased costs to consumers of fossil fuel-based energy while our country switches to abundant alternative energies.;Passing this fee-and-dividend program is the right step toward a livable, sustainable future.;Lynne Girdlestone;Newhall;A carbon tax could be a great way to combat climate change. But so many versions have the revenue being rebated to the public one way or another.;If you want to use the tax to change our carbon-consuming behavior, what incentive will there be when the money comes back and you can spend it on more gasoline or other energy sources that release carbon dioxide? Such a tax would work only if the revenue is used to help fund replacement options for our energy needs.;None of the revenue should be used to reduce the deficit, which would addict us to a money stream tied to bad behavior. If the tax is effective, eventually our carbon-free economy would make the revenue disappear.;Bill Seibel;Glendora;--;Special plates, missing money;Re "State misses out on license plate fees," April 19;The article reports that the state has failed to collect up to $22 million in fees for special license plates. California seems to be missing out on a much larger source of income: unregistered vehicles.;State law requires motorists to register their cars in California 20 days after becoming a resident. And yet every day I see cars and trucks with expired registration stickers or license plates from other states. These scofflaws cheat the state out of registration fee revenue and may be driving cars that do not meet our environmental standards.;The solution is simple: Law enforcement must make it a priority to stop and question the drivers of unregistered vehicles. Any vehicle not properly registered should be impounded until the fees are paid.;Michael Silverstein;North Hollywood;While it's been said that there's no such thing as bad publicity, noting that Californians pay extra to have a whale tail license plate in the lead paragraph of the article about the state's mismanagement of some specialty plate funds may have misled readers.;In 2012, the California Department of Finance reviewed all specialty license plates in the state to determine whether fees were being spent in compliance with the law. The department concluded that the California Coastal Commission is using its revenue from the whale plates in full accordance with its purposes.;The Coastal Commission launched the Whale Tail Grants Program in 1998 to support marine and coastal education. Since then, the program has provided a total of $7.7 million, supporting 461 projects throughout the state estimated to have reached a total of 11.6 million people.;Charles Lester;San Francisco;The writer is the executive director of the California Coastal Commission.;--;Taking stock of Yelp's reviews;Re "Take a critical look at Yelp," Column, April 20, and "Needing help with Yelp," Column, April 23;Yelp spokeswoman Kristen Whisenand "thinks it makes sense to give more credence to experienced reviewers, consumers have more confidence in those who are most prolific online.;Prolific Yelp reviewers certainly have experience in writing reviews, but Whisenand is mistaken that said experience equates with knowledgeable and discerning critiques. I for one am suspicious of reviewers who feel competent to comment on everything from knitting to diesel engine repair.;If Yelp's filters are meant to weed out suspect reviews, one wonders why Whisenand's self-serving review of Yelp was itself not filtered out.;John Brock;Hansville, Wash.;The major problem with negative restaurant reviews on Yelp is that they're written based on one-time experiences. A professional restaurant critic dines at a restaurant several times before writing a review. Furthermore, some negative critiques on Yelp are written in such a sophomoric fashion that it is difficult to take them seriously.;If a food item is accented with garlic, the eatery doesn't deserve a one-star rating based on a customer's distaste for that plant. Conversely, if a patron enjoys a fabulous one-time dining experience, a hasty five-star rating would be undeserved as well.;As the Latin saying goes, de gustibus non est desputandum -- in matters of taste, there are no disputes.;Giuseppe Mirelli;Los Angeles;--;Don't forget the Texas blast;Re "Texas town keeps the faith," April 22;Every time I turn on the news, there's coverage of the Boston bombings. As important as this story is, I am dismayed that so little is being discussed about the explosion at a fertilizer plant in West, Texas. Fourteen people were killed, 12 of them first responders. The town was devastated.;One reason this should take precedence is the lack of government inspections that were done on this facility. How could a fertilizer plant, a home to volatile, combustible chemicals, be under such poor oversight? Hundreds of tons of chemicals were stored there against regulations, but safety agencies were unaware of this. Many people fight such oversight, but this explosion appears to be a tragic consequence of too little oversight.;Let's hope something is done to remedy this situation for the safety of our citizens.;Debbie Cassettari;Chino Hills;--;Food for the soul;Re "Stop dissing the humanities," Opinion, April 19;I commend The Times for giving space to David Kipen's defense of the humanities, a much-neglected, undervalued aspect of American society.;When will we grow up and recognize the importance played by literature, the arts and all endeavors that create a society that might be called civilized? It's almost funny that Native Americans, once termed savages, cultivated their many art forms in keeping with their values and their respect and care for the environment.;President Obama's proposed 5% increase in funding for the arts and humanities is a disgrace. Is it any wonder that the United States is looked upon by the rest of the world as an overindulged child wielding power like the bully on the block?;Science may reward the body, but the arts feed the spirit. Surely we need that balance.;Peggy Aylsworth Levine;Santa Monica;--;Freedom!;Re "Singer became Woodstock's opening act," Obituary, April 23;As someone who truly worked and sang out for peace, freedom, equality and a clean environment, it is appropriate and should always be remembered that Richie Havens passed away on Earth Day.;Jerry Rubin;Santa Monica;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: WOULD a tax on carbon benefit California drivers?, PHOTOGRAPHER:David McNew Getty Images
