4/12/2014	Dig the law	Re "More laws, less treasure," Opinion, April 7;As an archaeologist with more than 30 years' experience, I can say that Adam Wallwork's analysis of laws protecting cultural heritage is misguided. Archaeologists don't seek "treasure." We seek information about how people lived in the past to help us better understand our own existence.;Patrimony laws are largely aimed at protecting archaeological sites from destruction by looters. Most sites don't have the "wow" factor needed to become a UNESCO World Heritage Site, but they can provide invaluable information about ancient ways of life. There is little correlation between when a site is "discovered" and when it is listed by UNESCO. The locations of most World Heritage-class sites have been known for centuries. The pressing need is to list and protect the ones we know about.;The lack of sufficient funding for archaeological research is partially the result of the global economic downturn and partially the result of Congress' antipathy toward social science and;humanities research. Laws aimed at protecting cultural heritage don't slow scholarship, the;political and economic situation is much more complex.;Cathy L. Costin, Northridge;The writer chairs the anthropology department at Cal State Northridge.;Wallwork demonstrates the classic logical flaw of confusing correlation with causation when he asserts that enactment of cultural patrimony laws decreases archaeological discoveries.;Many archaeologically rich nations enacted ownership laws throughout the 20th century, it is scarcely surprising that most major archaeological sites, particularly in Europe, were "discovered" before then. Further, many factors, including financial and geopolitical circumstances, determine the pace of;archaeological discovery.;Wallwork also fails to distinguish between;national ownership laws, which vest ownership of undiscovered antiquities in a nation and may serve as the basis for a restitution claim, and other "patrimonial" laws, such as export controls, which do not. Ownership laws are intended to discourage looting by denying title to the looter and a purchaser while gaining knowledge for;humanity through scientific excavation.;This endeavor is not about a race to uncover "treasure" but about;preserving knowledge.;Patty Gerstenblith;Chicago;The writer is a professor at the DePaul University College of Law, where she directs the the Center for Art, Museum and Cultural Heritage Law.;--;That's rich;Re "Patt Morrison Asks: Jeanie Buss, Laker woman," Opinion, April 9;Asked about Dodger fans' TV discomfort, Lakers President Jeanie Buss said;We went through that last year...but the deal we did allowed all our games to be in one place. Before, half our games were on Fox and the other half were on KCAL. Each of them had other programming after the game or before. The Laker channel allows us to have pregame and postgame shows, and ancillary programming, it allows people more of a connection with the team.;She should have said, "Let them eat cake while they make a connection.;Michael Lauer;Valley Village;--;Right path for college athletics;Re "In free agency we trust," Opinion, April 8;I'm desperately trying to hold on to the quaint notion that college athletes should be students first and foremost. Therefore, I applaud Mark Brilliant's idea of setting up a trust fund that spreads the wealth and yet is also tied in with academic progress.;But he leaves out one group that profits most handsomely from the current system and never seems to have to pay for any of it: the owners of professional basketball and football franchises.;Colleges provide nice, cheap training grounds for the NFL and the NBA. If the professional teams want to continue to have the picks of the college litter, the NCAA should ask the NBA and the NFL to play an economic role in making sure the athletes they rely on get at least some just economic desserts during their years in training.;John de Jong;Long Beach;Brilliant thinks a good way to solve the NCAA student-athlete dilemma is simply to spread the wealth of billions of dollars around.;I suggest a different path: Follow in the footsteps of the University of Chicago, which in 1939 shut down;its powerhouse football program on the grounds that it was a distraction to academics.;The university ended the premier program led by Amos Alonzo Stagg, which had produced the nation's first Heisman Trophy winner in 1935.;Let the aspiring athletes who place academics second to sports find their own way from high school athletics to the professional leagues. Let all colleges offer Division III-level programs, just as the University of Chicago does now.;Ed Umbrasas;Thousand Oaks;--;Out the window;Re "Windows XP has run out of time," Business;April 8;Windows XP did not carry an expiration date when I bought it. Windows 7 is not compatible with a critical work program I use.;The "apple" is tempting me.;Kathleen Rapport;Orange;--;Hands off the Monterey Shale;Re "A crude energy puzzle," April 7;Regarding all the happy talk about the oil trove trapped in the Monterey Shale formation, perhaps there really are billions of barrels in recoverable fossil fuel underneath California. But if we burn the stuff, where exactly should we put the carbon dioxide?;Last I heard, the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide was greater than 400 parts per million. This is a big science experiment because that is an increase from 270 parts per million before the widespread burning of fossil fuels began.;Of course, I do have a proposal: How about we put that carbon dioxide where the sun never shines? By that, I mean we should do the smart thing and leave it in the shale formation where it belongs.;Let's go solar-electric and drive less too. We have a climate crisis.;Mike Bullock;Oceanside;The map accompanying this article showing the vast extent of the Monterey Shale formation is truly frightening.;Imagine the destruction that will accompany extracting oil from those;areas that encompass the nation's breadbasket, much of Los Angeles and our great coast.;Think of the images of tar sand extraction in Canada, think of the recent mess in North Dakota and the myriad spills.;Some scientists say reports of the oil lying there are exaggerated. Hopefully this is true.;In the meantime, Californians need to demand a moratorium on fracking, and SB 1132 will do just that. It will expand the current study focused on the environmental and public health effects of fracking to include the economic costs and harms, effects on private property and land use, and risks to worker safety.;Let's get the needed information before we create havoc in our state.;Alby Quinlan;Encinitas;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: DO THE KIND of laws that returned the statue of Aphrodite, above, to Italy help or hinder archaeology?, PHOTOGRAPHER:Los Angeles Times
