8/4/2013	LETTERS	Snowden's safety;Re "What next for Snowden?," Editorial, Aug. 2;It's a bit disingenuous to say about Edward Snowden that "those who engage in civil disobedience should be prepared to accept some legal consequences for their actions.;Some legal consequences" could be taken by many to mean solitary confinement or multiple life sentences. In fact, the U.S. had to assure Russia that Snowden wouldn't be tortured or executed, given our country's treatment of Army Pfc. Bradley Manning, it was an assurance that had to be made.;You praise Snowden for alerting Americans to abuses by the National Security Agency, then suggest he should face trial and hope for leniency. This hope is quite extraordinary in a post-9/11 world. Time after time, we have seen individual rights sacrificed to the amorphous foe of terrorism.;The same intelligence structure that hounded Snowden's harborers is unlikely to show him anything but the inside of a jail cell for life.;Laura Brown;Pasadena;Sometimes national behavior boils down to self-esteem. Russian President Vladimir Putin's actions in the Snowden affair deliberately embarrassed President Obama and our government. Friends don't do that.;Putin is no friend. His behavior belittles the relationship. Obama's manner should reflect that reality. Business-as-usual and affirmative gestures, including moving forward with summit plans, should be taken off the table.;This is a matter of national self-esteem.;William Goldman;Palos Verdes Estates;--;Zinn's history vs. victors' history;Re "History meets politics," Opinion, Aug. 2;Sam Wineburg's cogent essay unwittingly makes a powerful case for Howard Zinn's signature contribution to history education.;Everyone I know in my profession who assigns "A People's History of the United States" does so for the right reasons: It encourages students to think with some detachment, shows how all histories are "constructed," illuminates the narrative in which we all have been submerged and invites criticism (if only for the simple fact that Zinn himself is so critical).;In other words, Zinn's take on history stimulates discussion and challenges our warm embrace of the traditional narrative. Students learn not necessarily from him but through him, which I guess is like saying that Zinn may have been a better teacher than scholar. No small reward.;Historians justifiably quibble with some of Zinn's facts and omissions. I do as well. But try and find another book that invites an undergraduate to imagine, maybe for the first time, that he or she might be part of the history they are being asked to read.;David L. DiLeo;San Clemente;The writer is a professor of history and humanities at Saddleback College.;Having served on numerous textbook adoption committees and a state framework writing team, and having taught history for more than 36 years, I know historical-political spin by heart.;When considering the mountain of works dedicated to selling "how the West was won," how John Wayne is often mentioned more prominently in high school texts than presidents, how suffragettes are cast as uppity women, and the claim that slavery brought Christianity to black Africans, there is almost no opposing viewpoint available. Zinn was that established and respected voice.;In the spirit of fair and balanced, I recommended Zinn to many of my students. With his passing in 2010, who will be the next small voice in a large and jingoistic wilderness?;Stephen S. Anderson;Hacienda Heights;I object strongly to Wineburg's questioning of the credibility of "A People's History of the United States.;Zinn's book carries out his assertion that "history is written by the victors." Wineburg asserts as much and credits Zinn with that statement.;But then Wineburg goes on to criticize Zinn's scholarship by attempting to show minor errors and the disregard by some historians. Finding a few erroneous facts in a 700-page history book in no way impugns the ideas or the conclusion. However, Zinn's book is well documented throughout.;Zinn's book is full of insights. Every major social area is examined from its historical beginning to its almost always tragic and greedy end. The stories are told through those who suffered greatly.;The criticism from Wineburg only shows that the victors continue to write our history.;Ralph Mitchell;Monterey Park;--;Killer whales deserve better;Re "End the killer whale circus," Editorial, Aug. 1;Thank you so much for the editorial about the documentary "Blackfish." I saw this documentary last week in Hollywood about Tilikum, the orca responsible for the death of a trainer at SeaWorld in Orlando, Fla., in 2010.;Not only were some of the ex-SeaWorld trainers crying over the treatment of the whales, but they told of how the mother whales shrieked when their calves were taken from them and shipped to other parks.;I would say the marine parks have a lot to answer for, as they misrepresent the lives of the whales in captivity (which, by the way, live longer in the wild) and provide inhumane living and social conditions for the animals.;SeaWorld recently opened a water park in Chula Vista. I'm sure it would continue to make plenty of money if it discontinued the whale and dolphin freak shows. I, for one, won't go back until SeaWorld retires these animals into a controlled sea environment where they can live out their lives.;Kathy Biggs;Valencia;--;Sin City's siren call;Re "Braking a habit of the Vegas trip," Aug. 2;When I bought my one and only Corvette in 2005, my first thought was when I would drive to Las Vegas to see how it really ran.;Three weeks later and with a full tank, I found myself cruising along Interstate 15 en route to Sin City. On what looked to be a very straight, safe and almost vacant part of the highway, I got my Vette up to 124 miles per hour and decided that was fast enough. There were no cops and no problems, but I knew this was a free gift.;The Times' article on Nevada state troopers cracking down on speeding motorists does a good job explaining the hazards of driving fast. I understand fully a person's excitement when approaching Vegas, but receiving a ticket could easily set you back more than you might lose playing craps or blackjack.;What people should remember is that if they slow down, those slot machines will still be there waiting.;Bill Spitalnick;Newport Beach;--;Otter law;Re "No-otter zone is sought by lawsuit," Aug. 2;I was the chief negotiated for affected fishermen before Congress established the "otter-free zone" off the Southern California coast in 1986. But in 1993, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service abandoned that program.;Before the passage of Public Law 99-625 in 1986, our legal counsel at the time, the Pacific Legal Foundation, determined that the proposal to translocate sea otters to San Nicolas Island violated the Marine Mammal Protection Act. Attorneys for the Interior Department agreed. This brought all parties to the table.;Congress drafted this law as a compromise. Under it, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service could translocate sea otters and fishermen would receive protection of their fishing grounds. The agency published a translocation plan and rules in the Federal Register.;The Fish and Wildlife Service should be obligated to obey the law it helped create.;Steven L. Rebuck;San Luis Obispo;--;Chandler's L.A.;Re "Violence linked to climate change," Aug. 2;Who needs data when we have the truthiness of Raymond Chandler's beautiful writing from his novel "Red Wind;There was a desert wind blowing that night. It was one of those hot dry Santa Anas that come down through the mountain passes and curl your hair and make your nerves jump and your skin itch. On nights like that every booze party ends in a fight. Meek little wives feel the edge of the carving knife and study their husbands' necks.;Richard Jackson;Arroyo Grande;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: LAWYER Anatoly Kucherena shows the document that allows Edward Snowden to remain in Russia., PHOTOGRAPHER:Associated Press
