8/25/2013	LETTERS;Fixing what's broken	Re "$3-billion proposal to repair Los Angeles streets advances," Aug. 22;Your article says the city lacks a "comprehensive list of damaged sidewalks" and that officials say creating one would cost "$10 million and take three years. Los Angeles can't borrow money to fix sidewalks until it can identify which ones are broken.;I guarantee that every broken sidewalk has at least one resident or property or business owner who would love to report the damage and have it repaired.;Here's my suggestion: Set up a working application so that residents can submit pictures and addresses of broken sidewalks to the designated agency. Then, allow 120 days for submission by residents and concerned citizens of all the broken sidewalks they can document. Last, fix the darned sidewalks.;Sarah Bagby;Los Angeles;--;Welfare ideas, right and left;Re "Why get off welfare?," Opinion, Aug. 22;I never cease to be amazed at the singularity of economic solutions proposed by conservative thinkers. When arguing taxes, conservatives insist that cutting them will encourage small businesses to create jobs, providing a broader taxpaying base, while increasing taxes will reduce jobs and therefore reduce the amount of taxes going to government.;In his article, Michael Tanner argues that if benefit payments were lower than wages for entry-level jobs, it would encourage the poor to seek work.;Why not increase the minimum wage instead? Would that not also encourage the poor to seek employment?;Jack Berens;Alta Loma;I hate these pieces from detached think tank analysts who do all these calculations without bothering to actually interview people to find out why they are where they are.;After working about 30 years in the welfare system in the state of California, here are things he didn't take into consideration;Lack of affordable housing. The high rents in many areas and years-long waiting lists for subsidized housing make a joke out of his projection.;Lack of education and job history. We did get many people off the rolls and into jobs when the 1996 Welfare to Work rules became effective. What's left are those who have a multitude of educational problems, including language barriers.;Child care and transportation. Two of the biggest barriers to employment, especially in areas that don't have good public transportation. And guess which benefits are the first to be cut when there is a budget crisis?;Chris Cheney;Santa Ana;Tanner correctly points out that the many benefits made available to individuals on welfare exceed the value of what they can earn by working. In order for parents to do what is best for their families, they have made the calculation that it is wiser to remain unemployed than to put their children in greater financial jeopardy.;His solution for rectifying this problem is to make benefits harder to receive and to reduce those benefits.;He has totally ignored an obvious idea that would go a long way toward mitigating the problem: Index the minimum wage to a minimum cost of living.;Ron Garber;Duarte;Tanner's "welfare recipient" is reminiscent of Ronald Reagan's fictionalized "welfare queen" living high off the hog at public expense and driving a Cadillac. Reagan's welfare queen was a composite creation meant to distract the voting public from the enormous disparity in wealth in this country.;Among the things Tanner does not tell: What percentage of people on welfare actually make $36,000 a year, which is far more than I live on. Or, what percentage of those on welfare live below the poverty line. Or, how many people who are eligible for welfare programs don't take them or simply don't know about them.;David Silva;Seal Beach;I cannot wait to read the other letters that will label this article and its author mean-spirited.;Someone will quote the Bible, another will talk about the secular need for compassion and altruism, a third will dispute the math or statistics, I'm wagering that a fourth response from an actual welfare recipient claiming it as an entitlement could be printed as well.;None would change the conspicuous truth that our elected officials have established a system of reward that nourishes the unproductive.;Altruism has its place, especially for those with disabilities. But to incentivize people to turn their back on opportunity is generosity misplaced. Tanner's analysis and suggestions toward a cure are unimpeachable.;Glenn Toth;Playa Del Rey;The piece actually makes a good argument for decent wages and benefits. Shouldn't work pay more than welfare?;Julie Ziegler;Torrance;--;College abroad can be the ticket;Re "Think outside the quad," Opinion, Aug. 22;Author Aaron Rosen makes a great case for going to Europe for college, but focuses almost entirely on Britain. For those a bit more adventurous, Germany also offers an excellent option. Public universities are well funded, so even world-class ones such as Heidelberg or Gottingen can charge low student fees. There is, of course, a language barrier, especially in the humanities, but programs in the sciences typically are taught in English.;Ken Brown;Gottingen, Germany;One can see the many distinct advantages for U.S. students to attending university in Britain. However, reports indicate that many high school graduates today would find English to be a foreign language.;Dan Anzel;Los Angeles;--;Edison's task;Re "Don't let Edison off the hook for its incompetence," Column, Aug. 21;I am an Edison ratepayer and I operate a construction company in Edison territory. The only part of Michael Hiltzik's column that does not delve into hyperbole is his statement that "the PUC would have to decide" the issue on the shared costs of shutting down San Onofre.;This is true because California law empowers the PUC as the arbiter to determine what is fair between ratepayers and a utility.;What is needed now is not shrill debate but a look at the law, precedent and an understanding of how electrical power is provided as a regulated commodity in California.;Anything else does a disservice to the important issues that decision makers must consider, issues that will affect how utilities invest in California's power future.;Mike Rotolo;El Segundo;--;CalFresh bill;Re "California no friend to food stamps," Aug. 18;Thank you for your article highlighting California's bottom rank for participation of eligible families in the national food stamp program, known in our state as CalFresh.;To help address some of the challenges families face when applying for CalFresh, I introduced legislation this year that reduces the paperwork burden on applicants who qualify for child care deductions. Senate Bill 672 has received bipartisan support.;Families should not have to submit paperwork that is not required under federal law. We must create a user-friendly program that helps get working parents back on their feet quickly and efficiently.;Mark Leno;Sacramento;The writer is a state senator from San Francisco.;--;Love for Tuff;Re "Kind words defused threat," Aug. 23;So good to hear such a positive story for a change. This lady was so rightly named Tuff.;My only complaint was that you showed a photo of the would-be killer but no picture of the hero, Antoinette Tuff.;Anthony Lawrence;Woodland Hills;I am overcome with gratitude for Tuff's love and courage. Her preventing a single death is heroic.;But I also think that being prepared to kill a gunman is preferable to a massacre where (Tuff)love is absent.;Jim Johnson;San Diego;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: AS IN MANY major U.S. cities, potholes plague Los Angeles motorists and maintenance workers., PHOTOGRAPHER:Liz O. Baylen Los Angeles Times
