6/23/2013	LETTERS	LAX: Terminal case?;Re "A party despite delay," June 21;There is plenty of jubilation going around about the new Tom Bradley International Terminal at Los Angeles International Airport, and deservedly so. However, once the terminal opens, arriving and departing passengers will still face the same problems that have built up over the last 60 years.;The traffic congestion caused by shuttle vans, cars, taxis and no presence at all of rail transport keeps LAX in the dark ages. It's going to take more than just spiffing up one building to create a world-class airport.;Juan Matute;Claremont;--;Art for more than art's sake;Re "Why arts and humanities matter," Opinion, June 20;James Cuno laments the decline in emphasis on arts and humanities as more students are attracted to hard science and engineering because of a job market that "disproportionately" rewards these fields.;I agree that the humanities enrich the human experience and that it is appropriate that an exposure to them is required for all graduates. But Cuno goes far beyond this, asserting that intelligence, passion, imagination and "the ability to connect with others" are all developed specifically by studying the humanities, without which future leaders will be unable to understand "what it is to be human.;Cuno does not cite any data to support these bold claims. Stating an idea in elegant prose does not make it true -- it must be supported by evidence.;It's reasonable that if fewer students are pursuing advanced studies in humanities, then the budgets for these departments should be adjusted to reflect this.;Cyril Barnert;Los Angeles;I applaud Cuno for his cogent argument that studying the arts fosters creativity and communication at the deepest human level.;But now, when research reveals that fewer than one in four eighth- and 12th-grade students are able to put a sentence together, there is little hope that education will prevail. The obsession with digital technology has usurped the desire for human contact and left us with little understanding of what real communication is. Where is the motivation to turn this around?;Since the vast majority of students -- as well as their parents -- have their eyes and ears perpetually glued to a glowing screen, it is, pitifully, too late.;Carol Surface;Beverly Hills;--;Pros and cons of iPads in schools;Re "LAUSD awards pact to Apple," June 19;The decision by the Los Angeles Unified School District to provide its 660,000 students with tablet computers is a step in the right direction. As the head of a nonprofit funder that provides computers and training to parents and teachers in three LAUSD schools, I have lessons to share;With our partners, we see schools thrive when teachers are well-trained and encouraged to coach one another in collaborative settings. Teachers who champion technology deserve support.;The district is right to let the computers go home with the students, and it's critical to involve parents. The principals we work with say training parents to email teachers and monitor grades engages them in their children's education like nothing else has.;In L.A. County, 30% of households lack high-speed Internet. If we don't want idle students and computing devices after 3 p.m., let's challenge Internet service providers to offer discounted broadband to parents who participate in computer training at schools. Only then will the LAUSD's plan truly fulfill its potential.;Sunne Wright McPeak;San Francisco;The writer is the president and chief executive of the California Emerging Technology Fund.;The decision by the LAUSD to use school construction bonds to pay for Apple iPads is a violation of the voters' trust. Surely it was the intent of the voters who approved these bonds for the district to purchase infrastructure that will last the decades it will take to pay down the debt.;New computer systems are traditionally purchased through grants or by using monies from a district's general fund. The state ought to find a way to overturn the LAUSD's decision and make it clear that the use of school construction bonds must not be used for projects other than infrastructure.;If the state does not act, then the voters will -- by becoming cynical and voting against future measures to fund education.;George Garcia;Long Beach;Each year, middle and high schools issue thousands of books to students. And each year, hundreds of those books are lost, stolen or damaged. Currently, the families of those students are responsible for replacing those books.;If iPads that are brought home are lost, stolen or damaged, will the families of these students be on the hook for replacing the $678 device? What is the district's plan for that?;This seems to me to be another poorly thought-out plan by a district that has had many over the years.;Tom Iannucci;Los Angeles;--;Costly tax cuts;Re "A tax system that targets workers," Opinion, June 20;Bob Lord's and Sam Pizzigati's analysis should form the conclusion of any study of the effects of supply-side economic policy since the time of Ronald Reagan. The evidence is in: Tax cuts do not pay for themselves and they are a poor strategy for growing our economy. At the end of 2012, the deficit topped $1 trillion, and in March, the government began implementing $85 billion in spending cuts.;With regard to these cuts, Lord and Pizzigati omit a critical point: Back-door taxes in the form of fees have skyrocketed while the quality and quantity of public goods and services has plummeted.;We are sowing the seeds of a crisis instead of planting the seeds of progress. Pruning the deficit with spending cuts instead of paying more taxes is a Pyrrhic victory.;We must not forsake investment in education, science and the country today if we want to reap wealth tomorrow.;Kevin T. Freeman;Anaheim;--;Obesity debate;Re "A problem with obesity advice," Letters, June 21;This letter perpetuates the stereotype that overweight people are just gluttons with no self-control.;In reality, obesity is a complex issue, involving biological, physiological and psychological factors. That is why it deserves the American Medical Assn.'s classification as a disease. If it were as simple as following "common-sense medical advice" (which amounts to "eat less, exercise more"), there would be no obesity epidemic. The reason "most would rather run from it at the risk of their lives" is that they have tried this advice, otherwise known as "willpower," dozens of times and have lost the battle each time.;Medication and surgery are only interim solutions until we know more about the causes of obesity. Less ignorance and more compassion would go a long way too.;Susan J. Leviton;Encino;The writer is a licensed marriage and family therapist.;--;No denying it;Re "Time to act on climate change," Editorial, June 20;Thank you for your editorial on the need to take action on climate change.;With 97% of climate scientists agreeing we have a problem, it is refreshing to see the conversation shift from "is it happening?" to "what can we do?" Anyone not on this bandwagon will drag us all down, so let's go full out focusing on action.;In this conversation, there is no space for deniers.;Thea Iberall;Laguna Woods;--;Walk of Shame;Re "Slaying on the Walk of Fame," June 20;Sadly, the killing of a woman who refused to pay $1 to panhandlers on Hollywood's Walk of Fame did not surprise me.;I grew up in Los Angeles during the 1960s, when Hollywood Boulevard was fun. Fast forward to last April, when I was back there when a good friend got his "star," and I felt sorry for many of the tourists in the area. They were accosted by fairly aggressive "hucksters" who wanted money for pictures or were shoving handbills right in their faces.;In the pit of my stomach, I knew something like this would happen. Somehow, the city should regulate this scary scene and erase what is now the Walk of Shame.;Jeff Prescott;La Jolla;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: THE CITY is touting upgrades to the Tom Bradley International Terminal, though it's not quite done., PHOTOGRAPHER:Irfan Khan Los Angeles Times
