11/15/2013	Aven has made a mark on football	The odds of a link between two record-setting kicks 37 years apart seem about as long as the 62-yard field goal Matthew Aven, a freshman kicker for the Claremont-Mudd-Scripps football team, booted against Cal Lutheran on Oct. 19.;But there is one, and it's Grim.;Terry Grim rarely attended football games as an Abilene Christian University student, but she happened to be in Shotwell Stadium on Oct. 16, 1976, the day Ove Johansson kicked an NCAA-record 69-yard field goal in a homecoming game against East Texas State.;After college, Grim married Lynn Aven. The couple had three children, the youngest of whom -- Matthew -- would tie a Division III record with his 62-yard field goal 37 years and three days after Terry witnessed Johansson's historic kick.;Maybe I was destined to kick one that far," said Matthew, one of only 38 college players with field goals of 62 yards or more. "My mom always told me about that game, and I saw a clip of Johansson's kick. It's kind of funny, because now I'm on the same list with him.;Terry Aven has vivid memories of Johansson's field goal, which was often a topic of discussion while Matthew kicked for Strake Jesuit College Prep in Houston.;It was thrilling to see, but I suspect the West Texas wind might have had a tiny part in that field goal," she said. "The wind blows pretty hard in Abilene.;Johansson had a 15-mph tail wind that day. Aven did not have the wind at his back for his kick, which tied a Division III record set by Rowan's Dom Antonini in 1976 and is one yard shy of the NFL record. However, he did benefit from a slight crosswind.;When you see it from behind, the ball starts three or four feet wide right and it comes back," Aven said. "I just kicked it with everything I had, and somehow, I made it.;With room to spare.;There was a wall five yards behind the goal post, and it hit about five feet up the wall," Aven said. "It might have been good from 64 or 65 yards. I don't know.;Aven kicked a 50-yard field goal earlier in the game. With a minute left in the first half and Claremont trailing, 6-3, and the Stags stopped at the Cal Lutheran 44-yard line, Claremont Coach Kyle Sweeney sent Aven in.;I didn't even know how far it was," Aven said. "But right before I kicked it, I realized we were on the other side of the 50-yard line. That was strange. After I kicked it, everyone went nuts. They ran on the field like we just won the game. It was pretty unbelievable.;Aven's kick came with a greater degree of difficulty than most long-range shots. Of the 40 college field goals of 62 yards or more, 24 were kicked off tees through 23-foot, 4-inch-wide goal posts.;Only 12, including Aven's, were kicked off the ground through 18-foot, 6-inch-wide goal posts. The four others were pre-1918 drop kicks.;He really banged it," Sweeney said. "It was amazing. He's done some impressive things here. Every time we've needed that big field goal, he's made it.;Claremont is hardly a Division III powerhouse. The Stags went 0-9 last season and are 2-6 entering Saturday's season finale against cross-street rival Pomona-Pitzer. But Aven kicked game-winning field goals in both victories, a 31-28 overtime win at Lewis & Clark on Sept. 14 and a 49-46, five-overtime win at Whittier on Oct. 26.;In that Lewis & Clark game, they called time out to ice him as we snapped the ball, and he kicked it 36 yards down the middle," Sweeney said. "We lined up again, and he kicked it right down the middle again.;Aven, who has made 10 of 14 field-goal attempts, did not come to Claremont with intentions of playing in the NFL.;The economics major, who scored 2,200 of a possible 2,400 on his SATs, chose Claremont McKenna College because of its strong academics. The school, which costs $62,000 a year to attend, was recently ranked the ninth-best liberal arts college in the country by U.S. News and World Report.;But kicking four field goals of 50 yards or more as a freshman might put you on the radar of some NFL scouts.;Kicker is the one position where the level of competition you're playing at in college doesn't make a huge difference," Aven said. "But NFL kickers are at a whole nother level of consistency. That's something I need to work on.;--;mike.digiovanna@latimes.com;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: MATTHEW AVEN kicks during a game against Rhodes College. Aven tied a record with a 62-yard field goal against Cal Lutheran., PHOTOGRAPHER:John Valenzuela, PHOTO: Aven, PHOTOGRAPHER
