5/22/2013	LETTERS;Talking the talk	Re "Conservatives need not apply," Opinion, May 19;Economist Kevin Hassett laments the scarcity of conservatives giving graduation speeches. He even claims that "a primary objective of today's academic institutions... is not to educate students but rather to educate reliable Democratic votes.;He doesn't give our college students credit for intelligence. As an adjunct professor of biology at Moorpark College, I praise my students (nearly half of whom have "undecided or undeclared" listed for their majors) for their openness to explore.;What Hassett fails to consider is that, given the record of conservative leadership over the last generation, young people today know who has their best interests at heart -- and who doesn't.;Jerry Lasnik;Thousand Oaks;It's an ironic turnaround. When I was in college, students demonstrated for free speech on campus. Now students from liberal arts schools such as Swarthmore, where Hassett is an alumnus, protest against speakers with conservative views. An example closer to home was when students disrupted a speech by the Israeli ambassador to the U.S. at UC Irvine in 2010.;Do college students today lack the ability to listen to and debate opinions contrary to their own? Are their opinions so lacking in depth that even moderate conservative speakers can't be given a chance at free speech?;I wonder if colleges are really educating thinking citizens.;Steve Murray;Huntington Beach;Does Hassett actually believe that it is the mission of American universities to "educate reliable Democratic votes"? If so, his Op-Ed piece goes a long way toward explaining why the GOP is becoming a largely regional party.;What would Republican speakers convey to a graduating class? Would they support the attack on women's rights, the return to health insurance exclusions based on preexisting conditions, or a life of work with decreasing Social Security and Medicare benefits to allow for lower taxes on the wealthy?;Hassett has put the cart before the horse. Perhaps Republicans are not invited to give many commencement speeches because they have nothing constructive to say to graduates who have learned to think critically.;Alfred Sils;Woodland Hills;I think Hassett misses the larger picture. There is only one question anyone in the audience wants to ask as speaker after speaker grinds through a torturous commencement ceremony: How long is this speech going to take?;It's a scientific fact that hot air is neither conservative nor liberal -- but it is plentiful on college campuses in mid-May.;Jeff Pollak;La Crescenta;If Hassett hoped to produce crocodile tears from me, his Op-Ed article had the felicitous effect of giving me hope for the future of our country. Perhaps the next generation of political leaders will come from this group of very liberal and knowledgeable students he and others like him so eagerly try to discredit. Hassett's article made my 86-year-old liberal heart beat faster with hope.;Frances E. Murphy;Monterey Park;--;Enron's Skilling and his jail cell;Re "Skilling doesn't deserve a break," Column, May 19;Jeff Skilling, the chief executive of Enron when it defrauded investors before its collapse in 2001, still believes he has the power to extort or bribe his way out of jail. It scares me to think that he might just succeed in having his 24-year prison sentence reduced significantly, confirming that justice is negotiable.;Let's drop all pretense here: Skilling is trying to pay his way out of jail, and if he succeeds, he will have reduced our justice system to rubble.;Skilling was one of the first smash-and-grab artists to be caught stealing with both hands in our unregulated markets, and we did not heed the call to strengthen oversight of the financial sector. His probable early release from jail tells me that we might have reached another one of those "let them eat cake" eras.;What's next? Bernie Madoff freed so he can run for mayor of New York?;John Thomas Ellis;Kentfield, Calif.;Columnist Michael Hiltzik omits any reference to the government's overreaching criminal charges against the accounting firm Arthur Andersen, Enron's auditor.;As a result of Andersen's having been found guilty, the company surrendered its license to practice in all states, and all but a few of its 85,000 employees lost their jobs. This verdict was subsequently overturned unanimously by the U.S. Supreme Court.;That decision came too late for the employees. No "we are sorry" by the government for overreaching. No "we are sorry" for anything.;Journalism would be better served if columnists like Hiltzik started with analysis and then reached a conclusion rather than the other way around.;Kevin Minihan;Los Angeles;--;Not buying it;Re "Hope is paying a visit again," May 18;Once again we have a "cry me a river" story in The Times about the plight of illegal aliens.;Hope is not paying a visit again. My son was killed in 2010 after being struck by an illegal alien motorist.;Hope is awakening from a nightmare and realizing your loved one is still alive and wasn't one of the more than 4,000 people a year killed by illegal alien drivers. (That's from my own research, based on a study done by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety.);You report that under the current reform bill, illegal aliens would have to pass a criminal background check. What it didn't say is that the current bill would allow for up to three misdemeanor convictions. Under the current bill you could kill people in two separate collisions and still be on a pathway to citizenship.;How about a story on the real victims of illegal immigration?;Don Rosenberg;Westlake Village;--;Another side of the USC story;Re "USC made this offer a no-brainer," May 18;In The Times' front-page celebration of USC's poaching of UCLA's top neuroscientists, a story previously reported by The Times, one of the top-paid future employees remarked on how kind a USC administrator was even to the janitors, remembering their families' names.;I'm sure the janitors would trade such niceties for a fairer deal. Only a few months into a new contract, the company to which USC has outsourced janitorial work cut back on jobs, forcing remaining workers to do more on low wages.;Instead of an investigation into USC's labor practices, we get cute stories about the "courtship" of eminent neuroscientists, including details of the dinner (chicken with leeks and mustard breadcrumbs) over which the wooing occurred.;Tania Modleski;West Hollywood;The writer is a professor of English at USC.;--;Science favors fluoridation;Re "Fluoride in Portland? Not all will drink to that," May 19;Clifford Walker, a board member of the National Assn. for the Advancement of Colored People's Portland chapter, admits he doesn't trust the "man in a white coat." He doesn't want fluoride added to Portland's drinking water.;But there are a lot of people in white coats -- including the scientists at the World Health Organization -- who believe that drinking distilled water robs the body of essential minerals. Other sources also make dire warnings.;It would be prudent for Walker to table his recommendation until he has the opportunity to do more research. If after doing so he is still of the same opinion, then his recommendation may be offered as an informed opinion.;Gerald F. McVey;Seal Beach;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: FORMER Bush administration official Robert Zoellick was to speak at Swarthmore College., PHOTOGRAPHER:Esteban Felix Associated Press
