3/23/2013	SCIENCE FILE;He is master of Madness;A Davidson College mathematician has made a science of predicting NCAA tournament winners	This is the busy time of year for mathematician Tim Chartier. When the NCAA men's basketball tournament begins, so does March Mathness.;His telephone rings. He's on the radio. He's talking to ESPN. It's his chance to explain what exactly he does for a living as a professor at North Carolina's Davidson College.;I can talk about what I'm doing, on a higher level, and people understand," he said.;What Chartier does is use complex math to win the Final Four pool on a regular basis. How regular? He's been in the top 3% of the 4 million submissions to ESPN's March Madness tournament challenge, which is arguably the major league of sports prognostication.;That's when we said, 'Whoa, this thing really works,' " said Chartier, who has two degrees in applied mathematics and one in computational mathematics. (He also is a trained mime and has an act that explains infinity.);Blame the fame on tiny Butler University. Chartier's math class recognized that fifth-seeded Butler was destined for the Final Four in 2010. That turned a lot of heads and convinced Chartier that their modeling was better than the collective intuition of sports experts.;That was the second year Chartier started making bracketology -- the art and science of picking winners among 68 teams in a single-elimination tournament -- part of his syllabus. That's right: Take Chartier's course and you'll get college credit for studying college hoops.;We use bracketology to test new ideas in sports ranking," Chartier said.;There's something in it for Chartier. His undergraduates serve as researchers, whose choices for weighing one team's record against another's help him evaluate mathematical models. And he gets them interested in the mathematics of complex linear systems, typically used in such things as programming Internet search engines.;The basketball team at Davidson, a small and selective liberal arts college, is seeded 14th in the tournament's East regional, for the record. Chartier is true to his school but he's truer to his math. He gave his Wildcats a higher seed but didn't pick them to win. That didn't make the team's first-round loss easy, though: "We had them losing, but not by 1 point on a bad pass," he said.;Chartier is going with -- well, let's do some math first.;Each team in the tournament comes in with a seeding, a relative ranking based on its record within its division. Chartier disregards it.;We don't look at the seeding at all," he said.;Students divide up the season into segments and begin assigning weights to games played at different times. "I may treat the beginning games as a fourth of a game. You win a fourth, I lose a fourth," he said. But when a team shows it can beat a better team late in the season, those games may get a higher weight.;That's how we found these upsets," he said.;But then it gets more complex. Students start figuring out what else they may want to weight. One student asked a hockey player for advice, and arrived at weighting games that are part of a winning streak. Others may give extra weight to close games against well-ranked opponents. Some have even tried to factor in appealing mascots.;This is the art part of the exercise. But they have to justify their choices, and figure out how to make it work.;The students then run their data through two basic algorithms based on matrices, vectors and some calculus. The Colley method (created by astrophysicist Wesley Colley) and the Massey method (created by Ken Massey as an undergraduate honors thesis at Bluefield College in Virginia) may not sound familiar, but they're behind most of the rankings you see on sports shows. That's particularly true when it comes time to pick college football teams in bowl games.;The Colley method, which can factor in the "quality" of wins or losses, got a black eye this year.;That's the one that everyone went crazy over when they ranked Notre Dame over Alabama," Chartier said. The Crimson Tide rolled all over the Irish in the BCS National Championship game, though. The Massey system didn't make that mistake.;Chartier watches his students huddle and argue over what to weight, how to do it and whether it works. They're learning more than he can possibly teach in those moments, he says. (Up for the challenge? You can learn the whole system online through udemy.com.);Not everyone who takes Chartier's course is a math or sports fan. Some are the "math last" students trying to fulfill a graduation requirement in their senior years. Others are serious math wonks who may not have watched more than a competitive chess game. "They don't know much about sports, but they say, 'Hey, there's this big math problem,' " Chartier said.;NCAA Division I athletes can't participate in his tournament contest, because technically it's gambling -- even though the reward is just a coupon for Ben & Jerry's ice cream. "The person who gets that will be happier about it than about any grade," Chartier said. "Part of it is just bragging rights.;What you wind up with is some 350 equations and 350 unknowns, formed from about 5,000 Division I games.;I teach the students how you would do it by hand, but we do it by computer," he said. "A computer does it extremely fast.;So, whom did Chartier pick?;Using a simplified Massey method, he agrees with sportscaster Dick Vitale: Louisville wins it all, in this case beating Florida, then Indiana, which beats Gonzaga.;Using a simplified Colley method, he got a Final Four of Duke, Kansas, New Mexico and Miami, with New Mexico winning. But low-seeded Harvard knocked off New Mexico on Thursday, in the tournament's first big upset. At least one student entry had Harvard winning its first-ever March Madness game, he said.;You simply can't quantify life," Chartier said. "March Madness, baby!;--;geoffrey.mohan@latimes.com;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: GONZAGA, whose mascot performs here, will make the Final Four, one of Chartier's methods predicts., PHOTOGRAPHER:Streeter Lecka Getty Images, PHOTO: TIM CHARTIER'S math class predicted the 2010 success of Butler, whose mascot takes the court., PHOTOGRAPHER:Darron Cummings Associated Press
