1/13/2014	TELEVISION REVIEW;TELEVISION CRITIC;Chozen' chases hip-hop hopes;An FX series presents an ex-con rapper with a limited sense of boundaries.	Now here is this unforeseeable artifact, "Chozen," a cartoon series about a gay white rapper, an ex-con (he was set up) living on his sister's couch at a liberal arts college.;Premiering Monday on FX, it is from people who make that network's spy-toon "Archer," whose visual style it borrows whole, and from people who made HBO's "Eastbound & Down." And it is very much as if they had taken these shows -- neither of which puts a great point on taste, sensitivity or modesty -- and run them at each other very fast. Some of this fusion works, and some of it doesn't, and even some of what works won't work for a lot of people. Indeed, if you are familiar at all with those series, you should already have a pretty good idea of your tolerance for this one.;As an overgrown child, rising after a fall, with a limited sense of any boundaries but his own, Chozen (Bobby Moynihan, from "Saturday Night Live"), whose real name is Phil, is very much a turn on Kenny Powers, the character Danny McBride (an executive producer and minor voice actor here) played on "Eastbound." He is a sweet person whom prison has turned into a person not less sweet, but more selfish, and ready to use force, or the threat of force, to get his way.;His immediate concerns are sex, food, "G.I. Joe" on pay-per-view and fulfilling the rap destiny denied him by old crew mate Phantasm (Cliff "Method Man" Smith), now a superstar.;There are weak spots. Chozen, who is emphatically but casually out, may break some stereotypes, but the writers also use more effeminate gay characters to denote silliness or to mock a politically correct attitude. (He is in a kind of relationship with a formerly heterosexual frat boy, played by Ike Barinholtz, from "The Mindy Project," as all but straight -- to retreat to a stereotype.) Though the show takes shots at hip-hop misogyny, apart from Chozen's sister, Tracy (Kathryn Hahn), the smartest and most reasonable character, the female figures are mostly around to facilitate sex jokes. There are a lot of these, because it's cable TV, yo.;In addition, Chozen's raps (performed by series creator Grant Dekernion, formerly a writer's assistant on "Eastbound & Down") are quite ordinary, and there is a lot of that kind of humor where men deride other men's manliness, often in anatomical terms, which is just noise to me.;And yet, as with both "Eastbound" and "Archer," if you find yourself inclined to go with the flow, there are things to enjoy and even to admire. Chozen is not a role model, but he is a kind of hero, and a more fully embodied character than the foregoing might imply, the show endorses his positivity but does not deny his absurdity.;As old friends and rap mates Ricky and Crisco, who are not tough at all, Michael Pena and Hannibal Buress are very funny working in the rhythms of normal humans.;If you even suspect you won't hate it, it's worth a look.;--;robert.lloyd@latimes.com;--;Chozen;Where: FX;When: 10:30 p.m. Monday;Rating: TV-MA (may be unsuitable for children under the age of 17);Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: CHOZEN, left, who gives the series its name, is voiced by Bobby Moynihan., PHOTOGRAPHER:FX Network
