4/2/2014	Wear and tear	Re "Nightmare scenario?," March 29;Metro's plans to tear up parts of Wilshire and Santa Monica boulevards, along with surrounding streets, will cause extraordinary around-the-clock disruption to countless residents and drivers. Imagine intersections at Fairfax Avenue, La Cienega Boulevard and Beverly Drive obstructed for months on end.;I served on a volunteer citizens committee years ago to analyze the Westside extension project. Metro representatives met with us numerous times to promote the project. In response to our specific questions, they told us that busy intersections would be slightly disrupted only for a few weekends. There was nothing about months-long disruptions or 24/7 work.;In the face of these misrepresentations and Beverly Hills' attempts to mitigate these impacts, L.A. County Supervisor Zev Yaroslavsky has the effrontery to threaten to sue us. Unbelievable.;Ken Goldman;Beverly Hills;Los Angeles can no longer continue in the mode of "one person, one automobile.;Yes, construction will cause plenty of inconvenience for nearby business owners and residents. But think of the temporary slowdown this way: Could you imagine San Francisco without the Muni?;If our friends in Beverly Hills want to obstruct the Purple Line, the state and county ought to take them to court. Let's get started on bringing this project to fruition.;Daniel Stutz;Atwater Village;The article mentions the constant "beep-beep-beep of backing trucks." The National Academy of Engineering has cited backup beepers as one of the top six noise sources people associate with behavioral and emotional consequences.;Noiseless alternatives to backup beepers have existed for years, including cameras, but beepers are used because they are inexpensive.;Washington state established a requirement for a spotter at all times who alerts the driver of pedestrians. We should urge our elected officials to follow Washington's lead.;I've lived with the noise of backup beepers for two years, it's brutal. The Miracle Mile activists mentioned in the article are correct in saying that the noise "would condemn thousands of residents to nine years of living hell.;Thomas Mann;Pasadena;The article notes that one homeowner "awoke at 3 a.m. to the yells of workers and the beep-beep-beep of backing trucks." Welcome to the last three years of construction on the 405 Freeway in West Los Angeles.;Joe Hilberman;Westwood;--;Welcome to the real world;Re "An over-educated nanny's lament," Opinion, March 30;Emily Koss' Op-Ed article lamenting her predicament about being an over-educated nanny demonstrates that she is not taking responsibility for the choices she has made. As a university professor and the father of a college junior and high school junior, I know it is important not just to graduate from college but to graduate with a degree that provides you an employable profession with a decent salary.;Koss says that for the first time education is not the answer for improving one's status and expanding opportunities. However, the U.S. Census Bureau says that over the course of working 40 years, a high school grad will earn about $1 million, while someone with at least a bachelor's degree will earn twice that.;Koss needed to ask herself before choosing a major if there was a demand for that degree. It's too late to ask that question after you graduate.;Gregory Frazer;Los Angeles;It's most daunting, as 24-year-old Koss relates, that meaningful employment has proved so elusive for well-educated millennials like herself. Let's hope Koss won't have to settle for menial day jobs for long after "slogging through 18 years of school.;Perhaps the iconic 1960s folk-rock song "Subterranean Homesick Blues" will console her as she continues to pay her day-job dues. Bob Dylan didn't much miss the mark when he empathized, "Twenty years of schoolin' and they put you on the day shift.;Gene Martinez;Orcutt, Calif.;Poor Koss and her friends are part of the "best-educated generation in American history" despite the fact that they can't find the jobs they want.;It's no longer enough to major in a liberal arts field with the feel-good dream of serving nonprofit causes. Jobs worthy of a paycheck today are nannying, clerking, cooking and teaching -- fields those from past generations worked "to pay the bills" until we could advance up the ladder.;Members of Koss' so-called best-educated generation should have researched the job market before choosing their majors in college.;Sue Perry;Morro Bay;--;More guns won't make us safer;Re "Georgia bill would go far in expanding gun rights," March 31;It is sad and appalling that legislation passed after high-profile shootings has resulted in an easing of gun rules instead of the sensible gun laws that we had anticipated, such as closing the gun show loophole.;According to Jerry Henry of Georgia-;Carry.org, we are not going to "stop crime by disarming good people.;Americans today have more than 300 million firearms. By Henry's measure we should be the safest country in the world, however, in 2010, guns took the lives of 31,076 Americans in homicides, suicides and unintentional shootings.;How can more guns and fewer gun laws possibly save lives?;Roberta G. Schiller;Los Angeles;The writer is a board member at Women Against Gun Violence.;Georgia's bill would go far all right. It would take us back to the primitive violence of the Wild West, to that "shoot first, ask questions later" mentality.;Even in the Tombstone of the 19th century, Sheriff Wyatt Earp enforced a ban on carrying firearms in public. But here in 2014, Georgia wants everybody to openly carry guns.;Americans should stand up against this growing product of ignorance and political machismo. I suggest meaningful boycotts of tourism and businesses in Georgia.;I, for one, will never enter Georgia if this bill is signed into law.;I hope that the Hollywood company shooting "The Walking Dead" in Georgia will see the sad irony in this title and find a more civilized place to do business.;Anthony Lawrence;Woodland Hills;--;Another view of Medicare;Re "Bickering over;Medicare," Editorial, March 27;Your assertion that the Medicare sustainable growth rate, or SGR, represents only "paper savings" is not supported by the actual history of the SGR and "doc fixes" enacted by Congress.;Though it is true that most SGR cuts have not gone into effect as scheduled, the SGR has actually done a great deal to control healthcare costs by keeping physician payment updates modest and pushing policymakers to offset the cost of avoiding cuts.;Congress has almost always identified alternative savings to replace the savings required by the SGR. The annual "doc fix" bills have resulted in substantial savings, including many significant Medicare reforms that likely would have been ignored but for the need to offset doc fixes. The proposed replacement system would actually cost far more than continuing the annual doc fixes.;Passing a permanent doc fix without offsets would be the exception, not the rule, and it would be a costly one that adds to our debt.;Ed Lorenzen;Washington;The writer is a senior policy adviser at the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.;Illustration;Caption: PHOTO: CREWS WORK ON the Purple Line extension on La Brea Avenue just north of Wilshire Boulevard., PHOTOGRAPHER:Ricardo DeAratanha Los Angeles Times
