

Monday 31 March 2014 05.45 EDT	What government can do with big data – livechat	Join us online on Tuesday 15 April to talk about the potential of big data to transform public services and kickstart innovation • Big data and open data: what's what and why does it matter? • Read the roundup	With the announcement of the Alan Turing Institute for big data research in the 2014 budget, and the release of a new £73m fund for research in a range of topics from transport to obesity, the government has shown it is serious about unlocking big data.; To make the best use of big data now and in the future, government must have the right infrastructure in place. Last year's report from the Policy Exchange thinktank said that government could save up to £33bn a year through better use of data. It advocates a "data force", based on the successful nudge unit, to access data from different departments and identify where savings could be made.; New data science skills will be needed across government, but Policy Exchange pointed out that almost more important is ensuring that public services leaders are confident in "combining big data with sound judgment".; Closely linked to government's drive to make better use of big data, is its drive to make data open. Open data, particularly that in the public sector, is often big data – for example, the census, information about healthcare or the weather – and making large government datasets open to the public drives innovation from within government and outside.; There are already good examples of government using big data effectively. The troubled families initiative, for instance, has successfully combined data on families with a collaborative effort across public services at a local level.; On Tuesday 15 April 12 noon -2pm, our expert panellists will be online debating big data in the comments section below this article. We will discuss:; • Which existing parts of central and local government are best-placed to use big data effectively? • How important is open data in unlocking the potential of big data? • How can successful initiatives be shared with other parts of central and local government? • What changes are needed to effectively pull together big data? • Ways of approaching big data differently, through events such as hackdays • The impact of good leadership and champions of open data and big data; For more information contact tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com.; Chris Yiu, director of digital participation at the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and former head of digital government at Policy Exchange – @clry2; Tom Smith, director of the Oxford Consultants for Social Inclusion – @_datasmith; Tom Heath, head of research at the Open Data Institute – @tommyh; Ed Parkes, senior programme manager for open data challenge series at Nesta - @edtparkes; Lillian Pierson, founder of Data-Mania – @BigDataGal; Giuseppe Sollazzo, senior systems analyst at St George's, University of London, and member of the open data user group – @puntofisso; Ben Taylor, who was funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council to write a parliament research briefing on social media and big data; Alexander Stevenson, author of Public Sector: Managing the unmanageable – @alsteve1; Claire Vyvyan, executive director and general manager of public sector and large institutions at Dell UK; Paul Brook, EMEA programme manager on big data and cloud solutions at Dell UK – @PaulBrookAtDell; Peter Wells, project lead on Labour's digital government review – @diggovreview; • This livechat is supported by Dell; Join the Public Leaders Network for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on twitter via @Guardianpublic.