Tuesday 30 July 2013 12.02 EDT	What career can you do with an arts degree? – live chat	From history and philosophy to design, careers for arts graduates are diverse. For help and advice, quiz our experts on Thursday 1 August from 1pm to 3pm, or comment now	With university tuition fees on the up, many students consider the career opportunities their degree presents: you need to be able to financially justify your decision, it's not just a case of whether you're good at or enjoy it.; In the debate about how much university really prepares you for the world of work – and whether or not graduates have the skills required in the modern economy – arts and humanities tend to get a lot of stick. While Stem subjects are thought to teach specific technical skills that employers are crying out for, the benefits of arts subjects are less immediately obvious.; The new Destinations of Leavers from Higher Education research shows that the picture isn't quite so clear cut, however. For example, 61% of UK-domiciled first-degree students who studied engineering and technology were in full-time employment six months after leaving university in 2012. This compares to just 47% of creative arts and design graduates and 41% of history and philosophy graduates.; But 11% of UK-domiciled first-degree students who studied engineering and technology were unemployed. The unemployment figure was exactly the same for creative arts and design graduates, and 2% lower for ex-history and philosophy students.; There's also the benefit that career paths for arts graduates aren't as set as they are for other students and there are a plethora of routes you could take. So, if you don't know what job is best-suited for you – or you're not sure if your degree fits with your career ambitions – join our live Q&A from 1pm to 3pm on Thursday 1 August. Topics up for discussion include:; • Career options for arts graduates; • How to exploit and present your transferable skills; • Picking a career that suits your interests; • Job application tips; The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part in our Q&As is easier than ever. You can create a free Guardian account, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, you can tweet us on @GuardianCareers or email your questions to Kate Hodge.; Clare Whitmell is a Guardian contributor and a qualified business communication trainer. Clare specialises in writing and presentation skills coaching. She also blogs about CV writing and job-hunting tips on JobMarketSuccess.com.; Dan Hawes is the head of marketing and co-founder of The Graduate Recruitment Bureau, a niche recruitment consultancy that specialises in placing graduates into graduate jobs. You can engage with the team on @thegrbteam.; Clare Dawson is a senior careers consultant at the University of Warwick. She is an American studies graduate and has been a careers adviser for 15 years. She works with arts students to help them to plan their careers.; Sabina Usher is marketing manager at Instant Impact, a recruitment company that find top students and graduates paid internships and jobs with fast-growing SMEs. Instant Impact works across all sectors; from fashion to finance, marketing to consultancy. We offer exciting career opportunities outside of the traditional graduate scheme route.; Mark Little is executive dean of the faculty of fashion, architecture and design at the University for the Creative Arts (UCA). Before joining UCA he was head of the Ealing school of art, design and media at the University of West London. He inaugurated the department of media at Northumbria University, where he established the undergraduate and postgraduate portfolios. Mark has wide-ranging research interests across theory and practice in the arts and humanities.; Jonny Persey is the chief executive of Met Film School, an independent film producer and managing director of Met Film Production. Met Film School, based at Ealing Studios, is an independent film school that is integrated within the film industry and offers a range of undergraduate, postgraduate and professional development programmes.; Victoria Matthews is a careers adviser with 7 years' experience of providing advice and support on careers, funding and employability to adults on the National Careers Service helpline.; Jane McAllister is a qualified careers consultant working closely with Birmingham Institute of Art & Design (BIAD), part of Birmingham City University. Jane is also currently the chair of the enterprise and entrepreneurship task group for The Association of Graduate Careers Advisory Services.; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for our weekly update and careers ebook.
