Thursday 20 June 2013 11.00 EDT	It's a proto-fascist ideology. Top bankers as predators and us as prey'	Nyla Nox worked in the graphics department of a major bank and talks of the abusive survival-of-the-fittest culture. Share your experiences in the thread below	Are top investment banks "deliberate social Darwinist systems"? Quite a few interviewees on this blog have described investment banks as abusive environments. But they seem to consider this an outcome, not an act of design. Today's interviewee thinks it's deliberate. She goes by the name of Nyla Nox and for seven years, under a different name, she worked the "graveyard shift" (midnight-8am) in the graphics department of two major banks, one of which she refers to as "the most successful bank in the universe". She says:; Nyla has an advanced degree in the humanities, as had many others in the graphics department (a design and layout job where you turn texts and figures supplied by bankers into documents with graphics). Applying her training to what she saw for seven years, she says:; When Nyla got in touch with me, she wrote:; At the time this struck me as perhaps extreme, but reading her experiences perhaps she did see the beast in the eye:; Now you may think that this is how a meritocracy works. But then listen to this:; So what was it about? Brutalising the effectively defenceless as part of a survival of the fittest culture? Read the full interview here for more context as well as many other goodies, for instance the contrast between how mega-banks present themselves to the outside world, and what goes on in its bowels.; There is also shocking stuff about the scope for insider trading: "I saw more secrets in a month than most bankers in a lifetime: upcoming deals, trade flows, projections, takeovers. I could have sold it all."; And about incompetence at the most successful bank in the universe:; • Nyla Nox will be answering your questions and comments in the comment thread below. It would be particularly interesting if readers working in support functions in mega-banks could talk about their experiences regarding the alleged culture of social Darwinism.; • This banking blog features interviews with more than 90 insiders across the world of finance. Here is a guide to help you find your way. For insiders there is this index of interviewees ranked by activity.; • This young former investment banker echoes Nyla's points when she explains the reasons for leaving her job: "It's not the long hours, though these are terrible. What got to me was the artificial stress."; This senior equity sales banker has well over a decade of experience in a top bank: "The sector suffers from pervasive human capital destruction."
