

Wednesday 9 April 2014 06.30 EDT	From Pompeii: The Afterlife of a Roman Town – review	Ingrid D Rowland explores celebrated visits to Pompeii, from Freud's to Hillary Clinton's	In 1962, Atomic pizzas and Amalfi lemonade, along with espresso-makers and Sophia Loren, nourished many a foreigner's thrilling encounter with a newly prosperous, speed-loving Italy. Pompeii and Herculaneum were obligatory stops on the modern Grand Tour, and for at least one small American girl the first visit was formative – even if Pompeii was shut that day.; A family snapshot marks the moment. Bespectacled, with pigtails, fringe and princess coat, her first Brownie camera round her neck, she takes the measure of Herculaneum instead, eclipsing with her determined stare the custodian behind her and the younger brother at her side. One day she will become art historian Ingrid Rowland of the University of Notre Dame, one-time Mellon Professor at the American Academy at Rome, expert on Vitruvius and Giordano Bruno and no slouch when it comes to photography or explaining the chemistry of molten rock. Her Guggenheim-winning father has transported his family in style: after taking the liner Leonardo da Vinci to Naples from New York, they have unloaded their bright red Ford Falcon to the delight of local crowds. For the tired children, heat and lemonade blur with other impressions: a craftsman making cameos, a shocking plaster-cast of a 2,000-year-dead human being and the race to get access to as many houses as possible before sunset.; Rowland's history of the inspirational effects of Pompeii from the first century AD to the present day interleaves other travellers' experiences with her own memories of the site over 50 years, as disappointed child, authorised tour leader and, lately, concerned observer of Italian politics. This is not the first book of its kind. Judith Harris's Pompeii Awakened (2007) explored the manipulation of the beautiful ruins by such exceptional visitors as Napoleon and Mussolini. And some of the less familiar material has been rediscovered and discussed before, for example in Antiquity Recovered (2007), a collection of essays edited by Victoria Gardner Coates and Jon Seydl, and in Mary Beard's Pompeii (2008).; This makes Rowland's "personal archaeology" theme feel a little solipsistic, even territorial. Indeed, she proudly describes an occasion when, as a voluble young cicerone, she faced off an Italian rival and forced him to sweep away to another room. Day trips to Pompeii, she tells us, come in various grades, from the standard eight-hour coach slog to and from Rome, on which educated guides compete for attention with household appliance salesmen, to the marginally more upmarket tour, where coffee-grinders are replaced by corals.; Elegant, witty and beautifully produced, this book is aimed at a classier audience. It is less a guide than an overtly aesthetic appreciation of the site and its environs, poetic in its sense of connections over time. Rowland lines up a choice group of companions, among them Dickens, Renoir, Freud, Leopold Mozart, polymath and volcano-enthusiast Athanasius Kircher and an 18th-century amateur archaeologist, Mr Freeman. We pause for specialist lectures on the techniques of Roman wall painting and the tradition of selling cameos as souvenirs.; Taking the long view, Rowland retells the fascinating story of the Renaissance "pre-history" of Pompeii, when it was already suspected, thanks to Pliny's eyewitness account of the fatal eruption of AD79, that a lost city lay under the rubble and washing lines of some coastal village. More creatively, she treats the site as a miracle inseparable from its prodigious hinterland: modern Pompeii, with its monstrous sanctuary church; chaotic, multi-layered Naples, where the legendary blood of San Gennaro protests against world disasters by refusing to liquefy; and the volcano Vesuvius, which has rumbled intermittently against the roar of air raid and motorway.; These days, she notes, the cameos are more likely to be imported from China. Still, some remarkable consistencies emerge from travellers' recollections across the centuries. Both Sir William Hamilton and Norman Lewis compared subsequent clouds of smoke from Vesuvius to umbrella pines, following Pliny's original image – though future eruptions may well be described in terms of bombs or atomic explosions. Tourists have continued to sentimentalise plaster casts, deplore local squalor and remark on the uncanny combination of vitality and emptiness. As Madame de Staël wrote in Corinne, "It is as if you were waiting for someone, as if the master is about to arrive."; Thanks to the chance proximity of sex and death – mosaic skeletons, erotic brothel paintings, human forms locked in eternal embraces – Pompeii has always been conducive to reflections on mortality. The year before young Ingrid was born, the Swedish actor with whom she shares her name arrived in town with her married Italian lover, also in a splendid car mobbed by Pompeian locals. The film they made there (Viaggio in Italia, 1954) portrays a troubled couple who catch sight of two clasping plaster casts and realise that life is too short for marital friction. In one of the stills, Bergman sits forlorn and overdressed on a stone slab. Behind the scenes, she was a forceful character, who seduced Rossellini with a flirtatious fan letter ("I am a Swedish actress … who in Italian only knows 'ti amo'") and bore him three children before the relationship went up in smoke (meanwhile, Sofia Scicolone was adopting the screen-name Sophia Loren because it sounded "vaguely Swedish").; Rowland puts this narrative suggestively alongside Gradiva, Wilhelm Jensen's 1902 update of the Pygmalion legend, in which a young man in love with a plaster cast visits Pompeii and thinks he sees the statue walking its streets – before she turns out to be a robust flesh-and-blood German tourist. Freud, who famously compared the depth and surface of the human mind to the strata of archaeology, saw the importance of the story's setting: Jensen had identified "the significant resemblance … between a bit of psychic occurrence in the individual and a single historical event in the history of man".; Yet it is more the gap between individual drama and universal catastrophe, both inside Pompeii and looking on from outside, that Rowland's account so powerfully conjures up. In her eyes, the ruins make modernity look ephemeral. The 60s skyscrapers that dwarfed the ancient dwellings have already been demolished to make way for an extra motorway lane. Site officials – some prosecuted for corruption – have come and gone. Thanks to pollution, contemporary signs and structures have crumbled far more quickly than the original ruins, which now cry out themselves for sympathetic government intervention.; Pompeii continues to offer photo opportunities for the rich and famous with the dead and ordinary. Hillary Clinton once caused a minor incident by insisting that she would not be fobbed off with Herculaneum. The gates of Pompeii magically opened for her, but US security decided against a publicity shot next to a superlatively endowed Priapus. No such restriction applied to Prince Philip on his visit, but the Queen was taken elsewhere, despite, Rowland notes, her familiarity with the world of dogs and horses. Stray dogs still roam the site, every bit as defenceless as their ancient plaster-clad equivalent. People go on buying and selling, quarrelling and making up in the nearby markets. But against the backdrop of the brittle town and its unpredictable volcano, any human upheaval looks somehow less remarkable – just another microscopic tremor.; • Emily Gowers's books include The Loaded Table: Representations of Food in Roman Literature.