

Tuesday 18 February 2014 02.29 EST	How students will be paying for other people's degrees	Undergraduate fees will be a main source of funding for postgraduate study for those with talent but no money	Keen observers of higher education will know that almost all universities now receive £9,000 a year for each home or EU undergraduate, who, in turn, typically builds up a debt of £27,000. But how are the universities meant to spend that money?; Some is recycled into bursaries for students from lower-income families. There are running costs: staff salaries; library books; rooms for teaching and so on. And now we are all worrying about the "student experience", not only "what happens in the classroom", but also what it is like for the students between classes. Where can they study? Where can they eat? What are the sports facilities like?; Many universities have accepted that, in return for the higher fee, they need to up their game. Dusty storerooms are being converted into trendy cafes and shiny computer clusters, paint is being ordered by the tanker load, and chewing gum is being scraped off the underside of library desks.; One question that doesn't yet seem to have surfaced is whether students should also contribute to the training costs of those who will teach. The system is evolving so this will, in fact, have to happen, which can only mean less money for other purposes. But it is happening by stealth, rather than plan, unless, indeed, it is a very cunning one.; In my general subject area, arts and humanities, an important change is in process, starting next year. It follows some decisions made by the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) that will have a very significant effect on university funding.; Here's how the system works now: someone getting their first permanent lecturing job is likely to have started their undergraduate work about 10 or more years ago. Doing very well in their first degree and considering an academic career they would have found an MA course, and if they were in the very top cohort, would have received a grant from the AHRC, and thus ultimately the taxpayer. All being well, next they would have enrolled for a PhD. And again if in the top cohort their studies would have been funded by the AHRC.; After being awarded a PhD they would have had the stress of temporary jobs while publishing the academic papers needed to be a serious candidate for a permanent post. Many decide against at this point, and go on to other careers.; Of course there is not enough scholarship money for everyone, and some will get an academic job even without AHRC funding. Many who were funded by the AHRC will not end up as academics. But the system has had one huge advantage. Those with talent but no money have been able to compete on a level playing field with the financially comfortable.; That is the story up to now. From this October the AHRC has withdrawn funding for master's students. Its reasoning is that the great majority of master's students they funded did not go on to do PhDs and so it is better to target its limited funds to doctoral studies. Consequently there are virtually no government scholarships for master's students now, and the universities will have to fill the gap. Otherwise there is simply no way that students from low-income families, however brilliant, will be able to undertake full-time master's study. And where will the universities get this extra money? We'll come back to that.; At least the AHRC is still funding doctorates. But it is now asking the universities to put up "matched funding". This dodge is on the increase. Having announced that "partnerships" are the future, research councils are using this strategy as a reason to pay only a portion of the costs of scholarships. And where does the matched funding come from? The same place as the MA scholarships.; Ultimately, unless outside benefaction comes in, there is only one possible source: other students' fees. Hence undergraduate students, from October, will be contributing to the cost for other students to take MAs and PhDs. Justified or not? A fascinating debating point. But it would have been nice to have had the debate in advance.; • Jonathan Wolff is professor of philosophy at University College London and dean of arts and humanities