

Monday 7 July 2014 03.30 EDT	What is social work?	The two international bodies representing social workers are preparing to vote on a new global definition of the profession • How do you define social work? Reader responses • More stories on our international hub	This week, the two international bodies representing social work will vote on a new global definition of the profession. These are the International Federation of Social Workers and the International Association of Schools of Social Work. With this in mind, it was fascinating to discover, by chance, a forgotten 1957 global definition in the federation archives:; "Social work is a systematic way of helping individuals and groups towards better adaptation to society. The social worker will work together with clients to develop their inner resources and he will mobilise, if necessary, outside facilities for assistance to bring about changes in the environment. Thus, social work tries to contribute towards greater harmony in society. As in other professions social work is based on specialised knowledge, certain principles and skills."; Take away the gender references and you can see some of the DNA of the profession, alongside the evolution. These days the emphasis is not so much on "helping people towards better adaption to society", but rather on the personal and social issues that cause problems and what is needed to sustain solutions in people's lives. One of the contemporary features that makes social work unique is that research shows broader social services can just offer a rotating door: someone comes in stressed, they learn to de-stress, they then return to the same social environment that stressed them in the first place, so they get stressed again. In contrast, good social work looks to assist the person to change themselves, and their environment, to construct a better life for themselves immersed in strong and positive relationships.; The 1957 definition also talks about "specialised knowledge" which could be interpreted as an expert-professional and non-expert-client duality. This is not reflective of today's social work practice, which respects people and co-constructs knowledge and understanding.; We learnt many years ago that our answers for someone's problems frequently don't help. Our role is to support others to find their own resources, strengths and answers. This approach takes considerably more skill from a social worker than trying to impose "answers" on others.; The 1957 definition is now more a signpost in the profession's development, and it was probably a progression on other practices it succeeded. In the last 14 years, though, we have seen and lived with another global definition, agreed by the two international bodies in 2000:; "The social work profession promotes social change, problem-solving in human relationships and the empowerment and liberation of people to enhance well-being. Utilising theories of human behaviour and social systems, social work intervenes at the points where people interact with their environments. Principles of human rights and social justice are fundamental to social work."; The adoption of this global definition by the federation in 2000 and the association in 2001 represented a major development. This definition has been influential and frequently cited in the literature. It highlighted the profession's commitment to social justice and human rights and has acted as an impetus for many frontline social workers to confront and challenge oppression.; Since its adoption, however, the 2000 definition has also come under considerable criticism. This centres on the perceived Western bias, with its emphasis on individual rights, and the lack of recognition of collective rights and the fundamental need for societies to achieve continuity, stability and social cohesion.; A further concern was that the current definition made no reference to social work theory or indigenous knowledge. The latter was of major concern to indigenous social workers who had experienced the negative impact of western social work models, forced on their communities with horrific consequences. Specifically, this includes the active participation of social workers in removing the stolen generation of aboriginal children in Australia.; Therefore, the two international bodies of social work established a joint taskforce and held consultations in all the countries where we have members. Various drafts were developed and tested. Every single word was heavily scrutinised in all parts of the world.; Submissions were received emphasising the partnership between social workers and the communities we work with, and that social work is transformative at personal, community and societal levels. It was highlighted that social workers often have to navigate competing rights: individual, family, cultural, groups, language. Simply stating human rights does not define the complexity of the task. Feedback also demonstrated that social work stresses interdependence and not independence; much of our work is on encouraging family members, community leaders and governments to take responsibility.; The taskforce carefully wove these submissions into a final draft that has been endorsed by the leadership bodies of both organisations. Next week it will be voted on in the general assemblies.; Here it is:; "Social work is a practice-based profession and an academic discipline that promotes social change and development, social cohesion, and the empowerment and liberation of people. Principles of social justice, human rights, collective responsibility and respect for diversities are central to social work. Underpinned by theories of social work, social sciences, humanities and indigenous knowledges, social work engages people and structures to address life challenges and enhance wellbeing."; Navigating the many passionate voices and perspectives was an extremely complex task. No doubt there will continue to be criticism of the new definition, as there has been of the past versions. I believe this is healthy and shows the maturity of the profession. Indeed, when the 2000 definition was formulated, the International Federation had approximately 63 country members. Now it is over 110 and growing.; The new members in both bodies bring new experiences and practice from Latin America, Asia-Pacific and Africa. To learn from one another and to practise our own principles of inclusiveness, it is critical that their perspectives are woven into one of the most important global statements of the profession.; There are many positive echoes of the 2000 definition in the proposed version that sit alongside a description of a more visionary profession, one that is placed to make major contributions to local, regional and global complexities. The proposed definition focuses on social change, human rights, empowerment and the liberation of peoples. It emphasises collective responsibility. It shows that social work does have its own theoretical base, that we construct knowledge in partnership with the people we work with, and that we also draw on other bodies of learning.; In my view, such changes show a more inclusive and confident profession, one that is more united in its core purpose and able to tackle the global problems we all face.; How would you define social work? Let us know by commenting below, or tweeting us @GdnSocialCare; Rory Truell is secretary-general of the International Federation of Social Workers; Why not join our community? Becoming a member of the Guardian Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free – online here.