Monday 14 January 2013 13.45 EST	Timberlake Wertenbaker: 'I'd love to write for Holby City'	She is one of our finest dramatists, having made her name with a play about 18th-century convicts in Australia. As Our Country's Good returns, Timberlake Wertenbaker talks to Laura Barnett about prison, primetime TV – and the time she accused critics of being drunk on the job	Timberlake Wertenbaker has grown used to people thinking she is dead. It happened a lot when her daughter was at school. Her classmates could never believe that the writer of their set text Our Country's Good – Wertenbaker's play about an Australian penal colony – hadn't lived in the 18th century, like the characters she describes. "When they met me," she says with a smile, "they were quite surprised."; Surprise is not the only reaction Wertenbaker's name provokes. Some people assume she's a man. "In the early days, I had quite a few fan letters addressed to Mr Wertenbaker," she says. "I had the feeling they changed their minds about me when they found out I was a woman." Others, on meeting her, burst out laughing at the strangeness of her name. How rude, I say. "It is rather rude," she agrees. "But I'm immune to it. And in the theatre, people know who I am."; So they should: since the mid-1980s, Wertenbaker has been one of Britain's foremost playwrights. Our Country's Good, an adaptation of Thomas Keneally's novel The Playmaker, had its premiere in 1988 at London's Royal Court, directed by Max Stafford-Clark. In Keneally's book, based on real events, a naval officer stages George Farquhar's 1709 comedy The Recruiting Officer in a jail, using prisoners as his cast. They discover a great deal about themselves – and about theatre – in the process. Why does she think the work is so popular in schools? "It's an adolescent play, frankly," she says. "It's about discovering that you could do things you didn't think you could. That probably resonates most with a 16- or 17-year-old."; The show won Wertenbaker an Olivier award and transferred to the West End and Broadway, where it was nominated for six Tonies. This year marks the 25th anniversary of the first production – an occasion that Stafford-Clark has marked by directing a new version. Following an acclaimed UK tour last year, the show opens in London this month, alongside talks and readings that amount to a Wertenbaker retrospective.; She dislikes interviews and grants relatively few. Inevitably, this leads to the assumption that she will be a remote, austere figure. The experimental style of her writing – Our Country's Good is regularly interrupted by a short, elliptical speech given by a lone Aborigine – does nothing to dispel such notions. But when we meet in the restaurant of the St James theatre in London, she's warm, with an infectious laugh, a dandelion cloud of reddish hair, and a wonderful accent – the product of her upbringing in the French Basque country by Anglo-American parents. She now lives in London.; It was Stafford-Clark who came up with the idea of adapting The Playmaker: he was staging The Recruiting Officer and thought this would complement it. Wertenbaker got the job, on the strength of her play The Grace of Mary Traverse, also set in the 18th century. It wasn't easy: after a year of research, much of the writing was done in the rehearsal room, with the cast arguing about who got to say what. "It was total panic," says Wertenbaker. "There were a lot of fights, a lot of 'I won't say this'. But we developed a deep bond."; Stafford-Clark's memories are similar. "There was lots of pushing and pulling," he says, "and the script changed right up to the last minute." But directing the play again has given him a fresh perspective. "Directing a classic play, whether it's King Lear or Our Country's Good, is a bit like driving a Rolls-Royce. It does everything for you."; Wertenbaker has written for radio and film, too, and translated plays by other dramatists, from Sophocles to Racine. Not all of her work has had the impact of Our Country's Good. The Love of the Nightingale, a 1989 adaptation of the Greek legend of the rape of Philomela, and her 1992 art-world satire Three Birds Alighting on a Field are among the most successful. Others have received mixed reviews. After the press night of The Line, her 2009 play about Edgar Degas, Wertenbaker suggested that its critical drubbing might have had something to do with the fact that some reviewers had come straight from a boozy award-ceremony lunch. "I stayed awake throughout the entire play," the Daily Telegraph's Charles Spencer responded, "and I rather wish I hadn't."; "All of that was blown way out of proportion," says Wertenbaker . "I probably should have let it go. Overall, I've had some very dismissive comments – and some very nice support." She doesn't read her reviews while a play is on, but it's impossible to avoid finding out what's been said. "Sometimes you get sent flowers because people are feeling sorry for you," she says. "It's like a funeral parlour. And sometimes you get flowers because people are very pleased with you. I've had both."; Our Country's Good is an impassioned defence of the power of theatre: the convicts' abilities as actors force their naval-officer overseers to acknowledge their humanity. The play is also implicitly critical of a prison system that prioritises retribution over rehabilitation. Wertenbaker had witnessed the transformative potential of theatre first-hand during her research period: the whole company went to see a play performed by long-term prisoners in Wormwood Scrubs, London. Some inmates started writing to Wertenbaker, telling her how much the chance to act had meant to them – and, not long after the premiere of Our Country's Good, one asked to stage the play at HMP Blundeston in Suffolk. "It seemed to me," Wertenbaker writes in the Methuen edition of Our Country's Good, "that the play had come full circle."; Were she writing it today, she wouldn't change much. "The play was a reaction to the fact that theatre was being devalued under Thatcher," she says. "Now, again, we have the devaluation of the humanities, with drama not being taught in schools if [Michael] Gove gets his Ebacc. Then there's the connection between theatre and prisons, and what theatre can do there. I think prisons today are even worse places than they were then."; She is also worried about the continued under-representation of women in theatre. She was vocal about this in the 90s, when she felt she was muscled out of the Royal Court by a new crop of bullish male dramatists. Although the situation is a little better today, she still finds things depressing. "It hasn't changed as much as it should have, given that there are many more women on theatre boards, many more women who are acting. It's just not reflected in the plays that are getting put on."; She recently pitched a play about older women to a theatre and was given short shrift. "I was told, 'We've already got one.' There may have been other reasons, but it's a real problem. The idea that women can actually have a life – that they're not just young women or old crones – is not getting through."; The sheer difficulty of keeping going as a writer, she says, is one reason some women end up leaving the business. "It's difficult for any playwright to keep going through the good times and the bad. And it may be more difficult for a woman – either because they have less self-confidence or get less support."; Yet Wertenbaker, now in her early 50s, is still writing. Her latest play, Jefferson's Garden, is based on encounters an American ancestor had with Thomas Jefferson, one of the founding fathers of America; it will be given a rehearsed reading as part of this retrospective. And she's about to start work on a 10-part radio adaptation of a major Russian novel (she'd rather not reveal which). Her ambitions don't stop there. "I'd like to write for TV," she says, "but nobody's asked me. Maybe part of a serial, like Holby City. I'm completely neurotic about health, so I could get into that."; So how has she been able to keep going? "By the skin of my teeth," she says with a laugh. "Every year, I say I'll give it another year. That's how it all began. I gave it a year – and just kept going."
