

Friday 11 April 2014 16.00 EDT	A Narendra Modi victory would bode ill for India's future		Without questioning the validity of India's democratic election process, it is crucial to remember the role played by the Narendra Modi government in the horrifying events that took place in Gujarat in 2002. The Muslim minority were overwhelmingly the victims of pillage, murder and terror, resulting in the deaths of more than 2,000 men, women and children. Women, in particular, were subjected to brutal acts of violence and were left largely unprotected by the security forces.; Although some members of Modi's government are now facing trial, Modi himself repeatedly refuses to accept any responsibility or to apologise. Such a failure of moral character and political ethics on the part of Mr Modi is incompatible with India's secular constitution which, in advance of many constitutions around the world, is founded on pluralist principles and seeks fair and full representation for minorities. Were he to be elected prime minister, it would bode ill for India's future as a country that cherishes the ideals of inclusion and protection for all its peoples and communities. Anish Kapoor Artist, Homi K Bhabha Harvard University, Salman Rushdie Novelist, Deepa Mehta Film director, Dayanita Singh Artist, Vivan Sundaram Artist, Helena Kennedy Barrister, Imran Khan Solicitor, Mike Wood MP, John McDonnell MP, Fiona Mactaggart MP, Jacqueline Bhabha Harvard University, Kumar Shahani Film director, Geeta Kapur Art historian Pragna Patel Director of the Southall Black Sisters, Sashi Kumar Film producer, Jayati Ghosh Economist, Prabhat Patnaik Economist, MK Raina Actor/film director, Ram Rahman Artist, Saeed Mirza Screenwriter, Anuradha Kapur National School of Drama in Delhi, Kumkum Sangari Professor of English and the humanities, University of Wisconsin, Gautam Appa Emeritus professor, London School of Economics, Chetan Bhatt Professor of sociology, London School of Economics, Suresh Grover Director, Southall Monitoring Group; • Jason Burke (Report, 7 April) notes that Uttar Pradesh's "socio-economic indicators are on a par with sub-Saharan Africa". This comparison does a disservice to a number of African countries, especially as regards sanitation. Some 74% of the population of Uttar Pradesh is forced to defecate in the open because of lack of proper toilet facilities, which isa higher percentage than every country in the world except Eritrea and Niger. Sadly, Uttar Pradesh does not have the worst rate of open defecation in India: six other states with a combined population of 350 million people have even lower access to modern toilets. Recent successes in Africa and elsewhere in Asia in improving sanitation facilities have unfortunately been slow-going in India. Elliott Green Associate professor of development studies, London School of Economics; • There are around 2.7 million people with disabilities in India, and only a small number of them have access to education, employment or the support they need. India spends less than 4% of its GDP on the vital areas of education and health, and disabled people are receiving even less support. Many disabled people, including those with deafblindness that Sense International supports, will also struggle to be accepted by their community and family. This election and its 120 million first-time voters has the potential to be a significant turning point in Indian politics and a chance for the new government to tackle the social divide. Despite immense growth and wealth, for some people in India, those with disabilities have continued to be left behind and must have the opportunity to benefit from the country's development. James Thornberry Director, Sense International