Wednesday 13 February 2013 02.00 EST	Political Science at the Guardian: introducing our new bloggers	Interested in science? Then you may be interested in the politics of science, too. You've come to the right place	About a year ago, a colleague and I unsuccessfully pitched a feature article to a well known science-focused magazine. They agreed the topic was interesting and had even been following it themselves. They also liked our writing but, with regret, had to turn down the idea because they knew their readers "weren't interested in the politics of science".; I printed out that rejection and stuck it on my desk as a reminder that, no matter how many books and reports and student essays on science policy I might pile upon my shelves, I had a lot of work to do.; I think people interested in science can be interested in the politics of science too. They don't have to be, and maybe it is a bit of a niche topic, but it is worth engaging with. I also think, however, that those of us who devote our lives to the subject could be a lot better at talking about it.; So here's our new blog where we hope to show how interesting science policy can be and find better ways to talk about it. We've got a core set of six bloggers – introduced below, in alphabetical order – and will be inviting other science policy makers and analysts to contribute too. You can read some of our first posts already, and there'll be more up soon. We also hope to learn how to be better at talking about these issues and listening to what others have to say.; The Guardian pay us a percentage of ad revenue. We decided to put this in a pot to run debates on science policy issues, so you can tell us what you'd like those to be on too (they won't just be in London, I promise, and yes we will try to podcast them).; We're still finding our feet a bit, but we're excited and hope at least some of you are too.; I recently joined Sussex's Science Policy Research Unit as a research fellow and head of public engagement. I'm especially interested in the way science is shared online, the politics of science journalism and young people's relationships with science. Up until recently I was a lecturer at Imperial College's Science Communication Group, where I taught on their MSc courses, researched science media and helped develop an interdisciplinary course on energy and climate change. My PhD was on children's science books and I have degrees in the history of science and sociology of education. As well as academic work, I write a bit for the Guardian, Times Higher, New Left Project and Popular Science UK. You can see other stuff by me on my personal blog or follow me on twitter @alicebell.; I'm currently running around after emerging technologies at Nesta, exploring how to support innovation in nascent areas of activity. That's what I will blog about most. I also lead Nesta's research into foresight methods - looking at how we think and plan for the future, whether that's to anticipate national policy debates or to inform corporate strategy. I was previously at the Royal Society's Science Policy Centre, where I most recently produced the 'Science as an open enterprise' report. The fast evolution of open and online research practices still fascinate me, so there may be a bit of that on the blog too. A while ago I spent some time studying Physics and Philosophy, but I promise there'll be no mention of Feynman or Frege here. I'm on twitter as @pesska.; I research and teach science and technology policy at the University of Manchester. My interests are mainly around what is often called "policy for science", that is public policy concerned with the funding, organisation and conduct of research. I will probably blog a lot about economic rationales – justifications – for science funding, and about how science is organised and funded, in the UK and elsewhere. I am very interested in the international dimensions of science and technology policy and in the mobility and migration of scientists, and will probably be writing about that as well. I have also worked on "science in policy", that is the use of scientific expertise and knowledge in policy-making, and indeed am particularly interested in what we might call "policy for science in policy": how governments fund and manage research done to support their policy-making processes. So I might write about that as well. I'm on Twitter @kieronflanagan; Mariana Mazzucato is a professor in economics at the University of Sussex, where she holds the RM Phillips Chair in Science and Technology Policy. She was recently the coordinator of a European Commission FP7 project on Finance Innovation and Growth and is the economics director of the ESRC Innogen Centre. She is a member of the High Level Economic Policy Expert Groups in the EC – i4g (Innovation for Growth) and Public Sector Innovation. Her widely published work focuses on the theoretical and economic relationship between innovation and growth, and in her latest work, The Entrepreneurial State, she argues that active state investment has been the secret behind most radical innovations – from the internet to "green". She is active in the media, and has recently argued that austerity in the eurozone will potentially kill off innovation. More information on her projects, media involvement and publications can be found here. Follow Mariana on Twitter, @MazzucatoM); Jack Stilgoe is in the department of Science and Technology Studies at University College London. Before this he was senior research fellow at the University of Exeter, working on a framework for responsible innovation. He was senior policy adviser at the Royal Society, where he looked after work on the science base, innovation, emerging technologies and public engagement. Before this, he spent four years at the independent think tank Demos, leading work on science and society. He is on the editorial board of Public Understanding of Science, a member of the government's Sciencewise steering group and a Demos associate. He is currently a member of the European Commission's expert group on Responsible Research and Innovation. You can follow him on Twitter, @Jackstilgoe; I'm professor of science and democracy in the Science Policy Research Unit (SPRU) at the University of Sussex, and an associate fellow at Nesta. Prior to this, I was the founding director of the Science Policy Centre at the Royal Society, the UK's national academy of science, and before that I worked for several years at the think tank Demos. I'm interested in most aspects of science policy, and my publications include The Scientific Century; New frontiers in science diplomacy; The Atlas of Ideas; China: the next science superpower?; The Public Value of Science; and See-through Science. I'm on Twitter, @jameswilsdon
