Monday 15 July 2013 02.00 EDT	Help – I'm a career changing mum about to train to be a teacher	Career changer Cassie Lockwood is relishing the prospect of a new job in teaching, but she has some unanswered questions	I am just about to be disowned by my parents. This may seem a little odd for a 36 year-old, married, mother-of-two, who is just about to become a student again, but it is pretty accurate.; With a primary school headteacher for a mother, and a head of humanities for a father, career chats for me usually went along the lines of: "We will support you in whatever career you choose, darling. Just so long as you don't become a teacher."; So what on earth makes me want to become a teacher? And why now?; My degree was in politics, and on graduating I wanted to be a writer. I followed that dream, and got a lucky break, securing my first proper job with a national newspaper. After a while I decided I wanted to move into the voluntary sector, and I became a copywriter. I progressed up through the creative ranks to senior manager of a creative studio. However, the higher I progressed, the further I felt from that one thing I always wanted: to make a difference.; And I suppose that is my starting point for this career change. I'm not so daft as to think I will go in like some kind of Robin Williams character and revolutionise a class of children, but what I really want to do is to inspire, challenge and stretch those I teach. To help them fulfil their potential in anyway I can. Lofty dreams perhaps, I can hear my teacher friends now: "she's deluded," "mad," "naive," "hasn't she heard about KS1 phonics tests?" but if those of us just starting out in teaching don't believe in these ideals, we have no place in a classroom.; It isn't just me in the Lockwood household who is starting school in September; my youngest child is starting reception this year too. I can't help but share some of his apprehension. While he is more concerned about still being able to play the part of the Emperor at playtime; Star Wars baddies are a staple at the moment, I realise I am entering a profession low on morale, where performance-related pay is becoming a reality, where the focus on creativity in the curriculum is being replaced with a drive towards recollection of facts. All of these weigh on my mind, however, I need to learn the basics before I get caught up with the politics. Basics such as classroom management, assessments, targets, how will I ever get up to speed? My focus for the next year will be on how I can get the very best out of this experience; in terms of learning what it takes for me to be an excellent teacher.; I need to learn how PGCE students fit into the broader school community. With various entry options now available, how do school-centred initial teacher training (SCITT) students, like me, slot in alongside the Teachfirst/School Direct/PGCE students? How will recruiting schools perceive the graduates of the different entry routes; will there be a hierarchy? What will the job prospects be like this time next year?; The impact of my career change on my family is one of my greatest concerns. How do teachers juggle family life with home life, especially with two youngsters – my children are four and six? While the holidays are greatly exaggerated, it is certainly some comfort that I will be around at similar times as my children, as opposed to trying to stretch out 26 days' annual leave to fit in with a school year, or simply tag team holidays with my husband.; Finances will also be tight, so if anyone has any thoughts how to stretch a student budget, I would love to know. And I know it won't stop at the end of this year, with teacher salaries hardly in the big league. I know I will have to adapt my own and my family's lifestyle, but hopefully, my children will get back what has been missing for a while now; a mum who may still work long hours, look frazzled on a Friday, but gets genuine career satisfaction.; And back to my parents, my response to the question of why I am becoming a teacher is pretty simple. It's not so much that I've taken a long time deciding on this career path, it's more that I've spent the past 13 years of my working life trying to resist it. Quite simply, it's in my blood.; Cassie Lockwood is starting a SCITT (primary) course in Bromley, Kent in September. You can follow her on Twitter @cassielockwood.; • What advice would you give to trainee teachers? What can they expect from their studies and the job? Post your tips and experiences in the comments.
