Thursday 29 August 2013 10.11 EDT	Research in brief – 29 August 2013	Our weekly round-up aimed at showcasing the latest research across the subject spectrum at UK universities	• University of Cambridge A study reveals that elephants are not able to recognise visual cues provided by humans but are responsive to vocal commands. These findings may directly impact protocols for future efforts to conserve elephants, which are in danger of extinction due to increased poaching and human/elephant conflict. Josh Plotnik from the University of Cambridge who led the study, says: "Dogs have a great sense of smell, but appear to be able to follow human pointing as a way of finding food. Perhaps elephants' sense of smell is one of their primary senses, meaning that they prefer to use it when navigating their physical world." The study's findings have important implications for future protection protocols for wild elephants. According to Plotnik, "If elephants are not primarily using sight to navigate their natural environment, human-elephant conflict mitigation techniques must consider what elephants' main senses are and how elephants think so that they might be attracted or deterred effectively as a situation requires."; • Royal Holloway University Scientists have developed a new system to help protect people from the cyber attack known as "phishing", which affected 37.3 million people last year. The process involves cyber criminals creating fake websites that look like real ones and luring users into entering their login details, and sometimes personal and financial information. Researchers have devised a new system called Uni-IDM which will enable people to create electronic identity cards for each website they access. These are then securely stored, allowing owners to simply click on the card when they want to log back in, safe in the knowledge that the data will only be sent to the authentic website. A key feature of the technology is that it is able to recognise the increasing number of websites that offer more secure login systems and present people with a helpful and uniform way of using these. Chris Mitchell, a professor from Royal Holloway's Information Security Group, says: "We have known for a long time that the username and password system is problematic and very insecure, proving a headache for even the largest websites. The hope is that our technology will finally make it possible to provide more sophisticated technology to protect all internet users." Uni-IDM is also expected to offer a solution for people who will need to access the growing number government services going online, such as tax and benefits claims.; • Durham University East Antarctic ice sheet could be more vulnerable to climate change than previously thought, according to research. Researchers say there was now an urgent need to understand the vulnerability of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, which at 4km thick, holds the vast majority of the world's ice and is enough to raise global sea levels by over 50m. Chris Stokes, in Durham's department of geography, says: "We know that these large glaciers undergo cycles of advance and retreat that are triggered by large icebergs breaking off at the terminus, but this can happen independently from climate change. It was a big surprise therefore to see rapid and synchronous changes in advance and retreat, but it made perfect sense when we looked at the climate and sea-ice data. In many ways, these measurements of terminus change are like canaries in a mine – they don't give us all the information we would like, but they are worth taking notice of." Stokes adds: "If the climate is going to warm in the future, our study shows that large parts of the margins of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet are vulnerable to the kinds of changes that are worrying us in Greenland and West Antarctica – acceleration, thinning and retreat. We need to monitor their behaviour more closely and maybe reassess our rather conservative predictions of future ice sheet dynamics in East Antarctica."; • University of Leicester An academic has uncovered the first English recipes for iced chocolate desserts. Kate Loveman, of the Leicester University's school of English, found the first English recipe for iced chocolate treats cited in the manuscripts of the Earl of Sandwich in 1668 – some hundred years before his great, great grandson allegedly invented the sandwich. Loveman's research reveals some of the continuities in chocolate advertising, highlighting women, pleasure and sexuality. The fact that frequent chocolate consumption might make you 'fat and corpulent' was also seen as an attraction in the 17th century.; • Loughborough University Polish graduates believe they lack vital employment skills and are turning to UK higher education as a stepping-stone to skilled jobs in the UK and beyond, research shows. Findings reveal that graduate migrants believe Polish higher education failed to equip them with essential workplace skills needed to gain skilled employment in the European Union, causing them to settle for low-paid and unskilled work in UK. Aga Szewczyk of Loughborough University, says: "Even at technical universities in Poland there is too much theory and not enough practice. Because courses in the UK tend to be shorter, they are a lot more dynamic." The perceived failure of Polish higher education is widespread and is believed to affect all subject areas. Szewczyk adds: "This is a problem across the board, from public universities to private institutions, from the arts to the sciences. The majority of graduate migrants I interviewed saw themselves as highly-educated, but lacking the skills needed to compete in the skilled job market. All in all, they were satisfied in the way UK universities prepare their students for professional life."; • Warwick University The effects of bullying last long into adulthood, research shows. The study is the first to look into the effects of bullying beyond just health, with findings showing the extent of which the risk of health, wealth and social problems is heightened by exposure to bullying. Dieter Wolke, a professor at the University of Warwick, says: "We cannot continue to dismiss bullying as a harmless, almost inevitable, part of growing up. We need to change this mindset and acknowledge this as a serious problem for both the individual and the country as a whole; the effects are long-lasting and significant." The 'bully-victims' presented the most significant health risk for adulthood, being over six times more likely to be diagnosed with a serious illness, smoke regularly or develop a psychiatric disorder. Wolke adds: "In the case of bully-victims, it shows how bullying can spread when left untreated. Some interventions are already available in schools but new tools are needed to help health professionals to identify, monitor and deal with the ill-effects of bullying. The challenge we face now is committing the time and resource to these interventions to try and put an end to bullying."; • University of Manchester A free interactive tool has been designed to allow researchers and members of the public to calculate the ethnic profile for any local authority in England or Wales. The tool calculates age structures for any area according to ethnic group, religion or national identity. A comparison of Manchester and England's Indian age structure, reveals that Indian young families are moving to Manchester in significant numbers. Ludi Simpson, professor of population studies at the University of Manchester, who led the study, says: "This tool will be of interest to anyone with an interest finding out what the profile of people living in their local area is like. There is much misunderstanding and misinformation about identities and the ethnic and religious profiles of the neighbourhoods around us. But this profiler will help put any misconceptions right, giving detailed information and a fascinating picture of our ethnicity, identity and religion according to where we live."; Would you like your university's research featured on the network? Email claire.shaw@theguardian.com with your latest news; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next university role? Browse Guardian jobs for thousands of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
