Saturday 6 April 2013 19.06 EDT	Nicholas Hytner's National Theatre offers a template for British business	Other industries would do well to study the methods of our leading cultural institutions if they want to prosper	This month is an opportunity to celebrate the success of one of our highly successful entrepreneurs and exporters. Not Sir Richard Branson or Sir James Dyson, but someone knighted for making great theatre. Step forward Sir Nicholas Hytner, who this month is celebrating 10 years as artistic director of the National Theatre. As ministers and economists struggle to find a basis for a successful new economy, Hytner's achievements offer some useful signposts.; In his association with the National (which in total goes back more than 20 years), Hytner has been responsible for staging a string of shows combining critical acclaim with box-office draw. To name just three: the adaptation of Philip Pullman's His Dark Materials, more recently, One Man, Two Guvnors, and the international blockbuster, War Horse. My favourite was London Road, an incredibly powerful musical made up entirely of verbatim local reaction to the 2006 serial murders in Ipswich.; Rightly, Hytner is best known for his achievements as a really great producer and director. But he is also the head of a business with an annual turnover of £80m, one that made a surplus last year and invested in new facilities, despite a substantial cut in Arts Council funding.; And he is an innovator, not just on the stage but, for example, in the Travelex season, offering tickets to both popular and cutting-edge shows – around a fifth of which go to first-time visitors – for £12. And when Hytner leaves his post, which he says he will do in the next few years, it will be in the wake of a £70m capital investment (most of which has already been raised) to transform the theatre's home on the South Bank.; Hytner is just one of a number of highly successful leaders of British cultural institutions who have become household names. Neil MacGregor of the British Museum and the Tate's Nicholas Serota are other notable examples. Their success, along with many others in the sector, is based on some simple, connected and powerful principles.; First and foremost, the best arts and heritage organisations are highly entrepreneurial. They're always on the look-out for new products and services, highly effective at developing their brand, and – lesson one for the rest of British industry – are willing to make bold, long-term investments to secure their organisation's future in a highly competitive and fast-changing world.; Second, although almost all our major arts organisations receive some public funding, the best leaders see this less as a form of subsidy and more as a stream of investment to allow growth and diversification. This is just as well. The National Theatre's subsidy has fallen by 15% in real terms in the last four years and arts funding is bound to be in for more heavy cuts in the next spending review.; Third, Hytner and his successful peers are acutely responsive to the challenges and opportunities created by the rise of digital content and the emergence of new global audiences for British material. One of Hytner's innovations is NT Live, which broadcasts the best of the theatre's work from the London stage to cinemas across the UK and around the world and helped to generate a global audience last year of 3.2 million.; Fourth, the most successful cultural institutions reject a simple distinction between artistic excellence and commercial content. At the top of these organisations, there is often a powerful partnership between artistic and commercial leadership. As executive directors, Nick Starr, Kate Horton and Vikki Heywood may not have had the same profile as their respective artistic opposite numbers Hytner, Dominic Cooke at the Royal Court and Michael Boyd at the Royal Shakespeare Company. But the success of their organisations comes from a level of co-operation and joint commitment that many private and public corporations yearn for.; Although it still raises the hackles of Tory free-market fundamentalists, in the government's quest for growth, coalition ministers, particularly Vince Cable and David Willetts at the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, have been willing to talk about the need for industrial strategy. Life sciences, advanced manufacturing and energy are all the subject of industrial strategies and government investment. Yet, perhaps in part because of the fuzzy boundaries of the sector, creative industries do not seem to be on the radar despite the fast-growing global market for creative goods and services.; If we were to have a creative sector industrial strategy, a tough question it would need to address lies in the relationship between the publicly subsidised, high-end arts sector and the rest of an industry that incorporates everything from advertising to shoot 'em up video games.; In the face of cuts in arts funding and the removal of direct subsidy for the humanities in higher education, the sector's self-appointed spokespeople, such as the often outspoken Hytner, warn that the well spring for future growth may run dry. It sounds like common sense and other countries, including Germany, are safeguarding arts funding while cutting other budgets. But the reliable evidence is pretty limited. Unlike engineering, when it comes to jobs in creative industries, there is generally no shortage of people with the qualifications or appetite to fill them.; Yet institutions such as the Tate and National Theatre should surely be seen as both commercial and cultural success stories. Relatively modest amounts of public funding have levered in multiples of income from paying customers, commercial partners and philanthropists. As well as the direct tangible income, there is the wider impact in tourism and, wider still, the British brand abroad. All this from artefacts and events that enrich our culture and brings pleasure and enlightenment to millions.; Perhaps this, too, is a lesson for wider industry. From both commentators and corporate leaders, there is a growing recognition that long-term business success depends on companies being focused on a mission to create great products and services that benefit customers and society. Companies that sell their souls for shareholder returns also, in time, lose their way.; There may be occasional criticisms of over-hyped and overcrowded blockbuster art shows, of the expanding gift shops, and even the National Theatre has its turkeys. But there is little doubt that what drives people such as Hytner is the love of their art form and the burning desire to open up its treasures to a wider audience. So, as well as congratulating Sir Nicholas on his 10 years, we should be heeding the lessons he has to teach. Lessons about the creativity, entrepreneurialism and corporate ethos Britain needs to take, a high road to economic growth. And continuing pleasure.; Matthew Taylor os chief executive of the Royal Society of Arts
