Tuesday 11 June 2013 12.00 EDT	Supply teacher tips: getting started in a new school	What do you need to know when you step foot into a new school? And how can schools better support supply staff? Supply veterans share their ideas and tips	When we asked our readers to share their supply teaching stories, skipping meetings, flexibility and honing behavioural management skills listed highly among the perks of the job. However, many painted a challenging picture of supply work. From rude staff and pressure to produce lesson plans at the drop of the hat to lack of information and support, most of the anger was aimed squarely at schools.; So what does make a good school to supply teach in?; We started by posing the question to our followers on Twitter.; "I could tell if it was a good school 10 mins in," said @MohammedSidat. "If the staff felt panicked that there was a teacher short then I don't know how they'd react if I told them I was Ofsted... You should be given weekly plan not daily plan so supply knows what they have learnt and what they'll do the next day".; @BarryNSmith79 suggested: "A school where it's normal to speak to teachers politely, working on assumption teachers/kids on same team".; While @BethKemp would like schools to provide supply staff with a "clear behaviour policy that everyone does use. Kids try it but sometimes they aren't familiar with 'policy'."; @InitialTT wants: "Proper lesson plans, not bits of random paper with notes – or better still, the freedom to let us do some of our own things."; I spent one year as a supply teacher, straight after completing my teacher training. I was desperate to start my NQT year but actually, in retrospect, I wouldn't have changed a thing as the experience gave me great opportunities to improve my behaviour management skills – control the class or die.; When the staff clearly understand what it's like to be a supply teacher, you know you're going to be happy covering classes there. As a supply teacher, you do need to be self-sufficient but there are ways people can make your life easier. In my favourite supply placement, the teacher called me the night before to mention a couple of issues. She explained how to log in to the system (the bugbear of supply teachers) and called me afterwards to thank me.; Her suggestions for activities were realistic but there was flexibility too, so that I was able to use some tried and tested ideas of my own within her framework. I fully understood what she wanted me to achieve by the end of the day and felt comfortable with her methods for managing the class. The children's targets were up-to-date so I could see what they were each working on in literacy and maths which was extremely helpful. The other staff simply accepted me as a fellow teacher and it was a wonderfully supportive environment. Many times I was called in at the last minute when a teacher was sick and on those occasions it was brilliant to find a weekly plan on the board – something I do all the time now.; What makes a good school to supply in? I think organisation at the start of the day is the main thing. It's useful if there's a booklet outlining timings, what to do in the event of fire and so on, along with details of any children with behavioural or medical issues. It can also be off-putting if the person on reception doesn't know you're coming and staff are unclear on whether work has been set.; My specialism is in ICT, so it's great to have access to a computer as laptops are often in use elsewhere by the usual class teacher. In addition to this, if the machine locks itself after 10 minutes, don't forget to hand out the password.; Having easy access to all parts of the building is vital, such as via a key fob or pass code, especially if there are other members of staff with you. There's nothing more embarrassing than standing outside with 30 children in the rain as you can't get through a door.; Finally, friendly and approachable staff make the day so much more enjoyable, particularly if it's the first time you've been to a school and you've travelled a long way to get there.; Supply teachers have a wealth of experience. They've seen different schools, different classrooms, different policies. It's well worth asking them the question: "How are things done elsewhere?"; My feeling is that supply staff don't always feel valued as a result of their status. I hope that's not their experience when in my department. I try to meet them at the start of the day, I make sure class instructions are available to them and that they know my extension number. I know they won't know the pupils the way the usual teacher does and so I like to be on hand if there are any problems. My classes know that my expectation of them when a 'visitor' is in is even higher than usual and I encourage pupils to ask questions – to make the most of their visiting expert. If the supply teacher is staying I make sure they know where the kettle is, where the biscuits are hidden and I really don't care who sits where at lunch.; There should be exactly the same value – and expectation – of supply staff as there is of permanent teachers. They are essential to the day-to-day function of a school and a great source of ideas and approaches.
