Monday 12 August 2013 11.43 EDT	Prom 38: National Youth Orchestra/Petrenko – review	Royal Albert Hall, London Beethoven's Ninth came full of youthful energy, with a fine new companion piece… and free	Performing Beethoven's Ninth has become an annual Proms tradition, but this year's outing was special, commemorating the bicentenary of the organisation which commissioned it, the Royal Philharmonic Society. Performed by the National Youth Orchestra, the concert was also free, in homage to the RPS's long history of aiming to make "music for all".; To be sure, this was no precision-engineered interpretation, but Vasily Petrenko seemed more concerned to maximise Beethoven's grand gestures and draw on the vast reserves of energy that comes from cramming 160 superb young players on to the stage, and an even greater number of singers from the National Youth Choirs of Great Britain (and Ireland) on to the galleried seats above. The soloists, ranked behind the orchestra, were excellent, with Jennifer Johnston and Ailish Tynan in fine voice, and Gerald Finley and Toby Spence both clear and light-toned but still able to penetrate. There were moments when Petrenko's pace felt uncomfortably fast, but the rapturous beauties of the slow third movement emerged well, as did the unruly atmosphere of the finale. Choir and orchestra also shone in Vaughan Williams's stirring Walt Whitman setting, Toward the Unknown Region, which began the concert.; To mark the occasion, the RPS invited Mark-Anthony Turnage to write a partner piece for the Beethoven (co-commissioned with the BBC and the New York Philharmonic). It's an invitation most composers would run a mile to avoid but Turnage was game enough to accept. In four movements (though without a choral finale), the work is entitled Frieze after Klimt's Beethoven frieze, and has an appropriately and at times overwhelmingly Mahlerian character. It's also full of Turnage's characteristic pizzazz, and the contrast (echoing Beethoven) between the third movement's winding raptures and the menacing syncopations of the second is very successful. Turnage is always friendly to brass sections, and the NYO's certainly went to town here, punching their way through the finale's ecstatic frenzies. Indeed, the whole orchestra played superbly, with Petrenko, who looks younger than most of his teenage players, keeping everything well in, and out of, sync.; • On iPlayer until 18 August.; • Did you catch this gig – or any other recently? Tell us about it using #GdnGig
