Friday 18 October 2013 08.00 EDT	The dyslexic lecturer: 'making mistakes shows my human side'	I can't guarantee correct spellings and perfect grammar, says Judith Williams, but I can push students beyond linear thinking	Another day, another moment of terror, standing with a pen in my hand in front of a large sea of eager eyes. This is a normal day for me, teaching students and academics in the school of medicine at the University of Manchester. And as an academic with dyslexia, I've learned to cope with this daunting but exciting challenge on a daily basis.; In my junior academic years, I suffered from imposter syndrome – the feeling that you are inadequate and one step away from being exposed – and used to spend hours preparing everything so not be tripped up or caught out. I still blush remembering telling my old head mistress how to find the toilets as they are signposted with human facilities, finding them in the Humanities faculty she still chuckles many years later, much to my embarrassment.; I thought preparation would give me confidence, especially when teaching. Instead it limited and fought against my natural interactive and experiential style of teaching. By swallowing my pride and being open about my dyslexia, I'm now able to deliver fluid, flexible and – I hope – dynamic teaching.; I will never stop having what has been described by many teachers as truly imaginative spellings. I often alter words, accidently, of course, and totally unaware of the highly suggestive alternatives that cause riotous laughter. You'd think it would be the medical terms that trip me up, but these are not a problem – it's simple words that I find trickiest. Brain can come out as Brian and so my students always look on the bright side of life when revising.; I always wondered why people thought I had a great sense of humour. Now I realise that this creativity is one of my strengths (and all through life I thought of it as a weakness). I will never be able to guarantee a teaching session with correct spellings and perfect grammar but my dyslexia enables me to push my students beyond linear thinking. I find it easy to make connections, pull together concepts and knowledge. In this way, I see my dyslexia positively as a mechanism that helps my students to see the bigger picture.; Being open about my disability has helped students to talk to me about problems that they are facing. Making mistakes also gives me a 'human' side. Sometimes students look up to lecturers as if they are superhuman – flattering, yes, but it can put them off disclosing important issues that might affect their learning. I've even had the opportunity to mentor students with disabilities through the Manchester Gold mentoring scheme.; I often get asked what I think life would have been like if I wasn't dyslexic. It's a really hard question as I only see the world out of my eyes. I was aware that I was different to others from a very early age. It's amazing how going for remedial reading and spelling lessons in primary school can affect you for life. Luckily, I had a fantastic mother who supported and taught me learning strategies that helped me to defy my critics and excel at university where my dyslexia was eventually diagnosed.; My mother's belief in me was infectious and helped me to realise that with hard work I could do anything I wanted to. I always remember her saying, "Life isn't fair – so get on with it." And with her words ringing in my ears, I have never let my dyslexia limit what I can do. If I cannot do something, there are different ways of getting it done to explore.; I chose a career in academia because I loved research and wanted to make a difference to how we treat major diseases. What I've discovered is that I love teaching and interacting with people. I am growing to appreciate my skills and what I'm good at, rather than focusing on the things I find challenging. I've found it's much easier to play to my strengths and collaborate with people whose strengths are my weaknesses and who value what I bring to the partnership. Through this collaborative approach I've built teams of fantastic writers, thereby reducing the pressure I put upon myself. This approach has been really successful for both my research and teaching projects.; The more people I encounter that have dyslexia – 10% of the UK population are dyslexic – the more I realise that we are all different. Not just in how our dyslexia affects us and shapes who we are, but in how we have learned to manage, work with, and think differently about it.; My first example of support was the PhD tutor I had; she was amazing and such a good fit for me. She's still a good friend, all these years later. As my job and career have grown, the challenges I encounter have grown at the same rate. Manchester's disability support office has been fantastic at providing bespoke, tailored support. But as I have become more confident in my abilities, I nowknow when I need to ask for support and, importantly, what strategies work for me.; Over the years, I have found a few things that have helped me to manage my day-to-day insecurities. Firstly, not being too proud to ask for help, I find it much easier if I'm open and honest about my dyslexia (for me, some days are worse than others). Secondly, by understanding my strengths and working with them, instead of focusing on my weaknesses, I feel more comfortable and can be more productive. Thirdly, technology – I cannot describe the joy when I first used spell-check.; By understanding my strengths and focusing my job, my career and my life on the things that I enjoy, I have been able to shape my role into one that I love and that I know I'm good at.; Judith Williams is a senior lecturer at Manchester Medical School – follow it on Twitter @MMS_UoM; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next university role? Browse Guardian jobs for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
