Monday 28 October 2013 15.45 EDT	Nobody wants their research impact to be graded 'considerable' in the REF	For the research excellence framework, academics now have to think hard about the effect of their work outside academia, says Jonathan Wolff	Not long left now. Just a few more weeks and someone in each university around the country will press the button and that will be that. No more tinkering, no more polishing, the Research Excellence Framework (REF) documents will be uploaded into the funding council's groaning server and, short of interfering with the jury, there is nothing we can do until we hear the result in a year's time.; For the last few years most academics have been living and breathing the REF, agonising about how best to boast about the "reach and significance" of their work or their creation and nurture of "cultural capital", not to mention their love-in with academic, cultural and commercial partners near and far.; For those lucky enough not to know what I am blithering on about, let me explain. The REF is the latest in a long line of punishments we in the university sector have inflicted on ourselves. This one assesses the comparative quality of our research in order to drizzle money on those judged to be best.; The core part of the submission, thankfully, is our publications. Most researchers must designate four items published between 2008 and 2013. Straightforward enough. Well, no.; Some genius worked out a way of racking up the tension. Publications up to the end of December can be submitted, but we press the button in November. There remains a chance that a publication scheduled for December 2013 will not appear until January 2014. Disaster! You will then have an incomplete submission.; Do you play safe and submit something else, not so good? Well, suppose the publication in question is your magnum opus and it does come out in December 2013 after all. You didn't submit it this time round, and the clock for the next exercise starts in 2014. All that work wasted. So which gamble do you take?; As in the last exercise, each "output", as our cherished publications are charmingly called, will be graded from unclassified to 4*. Unclassified means that you should be ashamed of yourself, given your age and job title. 1* is work of national quality. I'm not certain what this implies; perhaps that we would rather not let people from other countries see that we churn out stuff like this. 2* means that it is international quality. 3* means that it is really, really of international quality. And 4* means no, honestly, we actually mean it in this case. And the sad thing is that this is only a rough paraphrase of the real descriptors.; Still, the assessment of research by respected academics in the same field is understood to be part of the modern world. True, every assessment exercise throws up some strange results, which, like much in life, can be explained perfectly well in retrospect, but in prospect could not have been anticipated. We stoically accept such slings and arrows.; The new game in town is impact: the effect of our work outside academia. Is its reach and significance outstanding? If so, then you have 4* impact. Is it recognised, but modest? Just a single star for you, I'm afraid. And don't even talk to me about the unclassified stuff.; As academics, we naturally have two diametrically opposed anxieties about how impact will be assessed. The first is that, unless it was your research that led to the development of the microchip, your reach and significance will not be outstanding (4*), or even "very considerable" (3*), but at best "considerable" (2*) and therefore will earn no money. The other is that no panel will be prepared to admit that much of the impact in its area is miserable, and so all will win prizes. The money will then be spread out too thinly to do anyone any good.; Still, this is the first time that impact has been included, and we are still learning. Despite reservations about assessment, we like the idea of making sure that our work reaches a broad audience. We are all promising to strain even harder in search of impact, to instruct our new staff about its importance and to embed it in our research cultures.; By the next exercise in 2020, I'm telling you, we'll have impact coming out of our ears. And for that very reason the rules will have changed again.; • Jonathan Wolff is professor of philosophy at University College London and dean of arts and humanities
