

Monday 16 June 2014 09.10 EDT	Why don't comics stand up to banks?	The City of London festival will focus on late-night humour – let's hope it brings an end to comedians' silence on the banking crisis	It's so old, no one can say how and when it came into being. It's guarded by dragons. It's comprised of 110 mostly medieval guilds including the Worshipful Companies of Broderers, of Cordwainers and of Tallow Chandlers, alongside sundry sheriffs and aldermen. Its elections gives more votes to banks than to people. It's a "state within a state [which] lies outside the laws and democratic institutions of the rest of Britain". It's "like some prehistoric monster that has mysteriously survived into the modern world".; So: there's plenty scope for comedy in the City of London. And now, for the first time, an effort is being made to encourage it. Next weekend, the City of London festival launches with a new pop-up venue – a giant, inflatable bowler hat, located between the Stock Exchange and St Paul's Cathedral. It will host a range of events, but there's particular focus on its late-night comedy programme. "The inflatable Bowler Hat is our cheeky tribute to Square Mile history," says the festival director, and former director of the Edinburgh Fringe, Paul Gudgin, "and an opportunity for comedy and commerce to sit side by side."; The idea, I'm told, is to ask: "Is the City able to laugh at itself?" and "Can comedy lead a culture change in the Square Mile?" Well, it'd be nice to think so – even if the questions are unlikely to be answered by this year's programme in the hat-shaped theatre. Andy Zaltzman – sometime author of Does Anything Eat Bankers? And 53 Other Indispensable Questions for the Credit Crunched – is the only standup in the schedule whose comedy might actually address the culture of the City. Otherwise, it's just touring shows stopping by – good comedy, no doubt, but not bespoke in any way.; Which is fair enough – the programmers, looking for standups with something interesting to say about banking and high finance, can't have been spoilt for choice. I can think of one Stewart Lee sketch; a dash of Bird and Fortune; and I know there's a clown-theatre show brewing about tax havens , which I can't wait to see. (The global network of tax havens, and the vast transfer of wealth from poor to rich that they facilitate, is largely operated from the City of London.) But comedy has been fairly silent on what by any measure is one of the major stories of the age: the rampant corruption of the banking industry.; That's not comedy's job, many will say: it's only there to make us laugh. Well, maybe so – but (alongside moral outrage) black humour is surely the perfect response to the bizarre City of London Corporation, an entity rich in possibilities for comic treatment. And given that it's a medieval hangover into the 21st-century, why not give it a medieval response – a bit of satirical jesting, some holy foolery, the bare-faced subversiveness that only "comedians", back in the day, got away with. A culture change in the Square Mile may be beyond the inflatable titfer – but if Gudgin's initiative encourages in comics some motley-clad speaking of truth to power, I'll tip my hat to it.; • The City of London festival's Bowler Hat will be open from 23 June-17 July.; Tell Me Something I Don't Know Two benefit gigs this week for Josie Long's terrific organisation Arts Emergency, which works to widen access to arts and humanities education. Acts include Jo Neary, Grace Petrie, Sara Pascoe and Stewart Lee. • 18 and 19 June at Bloomsbury theatre, London.; Tony Law Edinburgh previews are coming thick and fast at London's Leicester Square theatre and its new sister venue, the Museum of Comedy. This week you can see madcap Canadian Tony Law's new offering, not to mention works in progress from musical comic Rachel Parris and sketch duo The Pin. • 17 June at Museum of Comedy, London.; Colchester comedy festival Ten-day carnival of live and on-screen comedy, workshops and a New Comedian of the Year contest, kicking off in Colchester at the weekend. Acts include Arthur Smith, hotly tipped newcomer Lucy Beaumont, Robin Ince and comic poet and Essex native Luke Wright. • 19-29 June. Details: colchestercomedyfestival.co.uk.