

Thursday 6 March 2014 10.48 EST	Worried about academic interviews? Here's how to handle tricky questions	Plenty of thinking ahead and clearly structured answers will help take the fear out of interviews. Steve Joy offers advice on 10 tough questions	This post is a companion to my last piece about preparing for an academic interview. I've trawled the archives to pick out common yet tricky questions, and I offer some ideas for how to handle them.; Clearly, this is not an exhaustive list. You will always get unexpected questions. The trick is to take a deep breath and let go of the anxiety that you need to find the "right" answer. Interview questions have countless plausible and convincing answers, but what sets good candidates apart is their ability to deliver structured answers, to articulate their thinking clearly, and to speak to the concerns of their interviewers.; It's amazing how many people struggle to give sensible answers, which creates a dreadful impression – particularly if it's the opening question. Prepare your response, which needs to be confident, specific, and well structured. For example, "There are three main reasons why I see myself as a good fit for this role".; When it comes to the content, avoid being generic (saying the same as everyone else). And don't sound selfish: the panel want to know how they will benefit from having you on their team as much as, if not more than, how you will benefit.; This might be your highest-impact paper, but it doesn't have to be. What counts is that you give a sound rationale for your choice. Perhaps you're proudest of the paper which marks a transitional moment in your research or your career. Or perhaps it's the paper that you know had a direct, positive impact on someone else's work. It doesn't matter, as long as you've thought it through.; Try not to interpret this sort of question as an attack. Fundamentally, interviewers want you to address their concerns. You work on gibbons – I work on gorillas, so how is your work relevant to mine? You study Shakespeare – I study Marlowe, so what can I learn from you?; Take a structured approach: "Let me break that question down into two. The reason why X is an important topic is […]. I understand that what Y is trying to achieve is […]. What I think that the two studies have in common, therefore, is […]."; What happens if your hypothesis is wrong? Your experiments fail? You can't get access to the archive you need? Your grant is unsuccessful? Don't pretend that your research is impervious to failure. Doing so will probably come across as denial or, worse, a lack of self-awareness. What matters is how you handle setbacks, and how you plan to overcome predictable hiccups.; Lots of people tackle this question by naming the job title which they hope to have attained, for example: "10 years from now, I want to be a professor." This is OK (provided you can explain how you intend to get there), but it's awfully predictable. Think about achievements rather than status. This question also gives you an opportunity to show that you have a vision for where your field is going. What's the next big question that, in a decade's time, you expect to be working on, or even to have solved?; Interviewers don't recruit candidates who see themselves in solipsistic isolation. So, based on all your preparatory research into this employer, identify the specific ways that your work aligns with their needs and priorities. Think about: particular specialisms, research clusters, possible collaborations, undergraduate or graduate curricula, interdisciplinary links with other departments, outreach initiatives, etc. Don't turn this into a conceptual answer – ground what you say in a couple of specific, tangible examples.; Too many candidates talk about prospective teaching as if its value were entirely self-evident, or they simply lean on the intrinsic intellectual interest of the topic. Instead, think in terms of outcomes and learning objectives, because evaluation is integral to good teaching. What will the students get out of the course? What work will you set, and how will it be assessed? What skills will they acquire? How will it complement the rest of their studies?; Panels are recruiting someone to work alongside themselves or other members of their institution, so it shouldn't be a surprise that working relationships are on interviewers' minds. In truth, some people are simply not good colleagues. So, what kind of a colleague do you intend to be? How are you going to help others to be successful?; This isn't a trick question, and the best response isn't necessarily just to say yes, without hesitation. There are innumerable factors that could have a bearing on what you might say, not least the vexed issue of waiting to hear back about other applications. But let's not assume that being honest is always a bad thing. The crucial point is that, before you get in the room, you should take time to think through whether you would accept the job, and to discuss it with peers and mentors.; This will almost certainly come up and is generally taken as a measure of how interested you are in the role. You should therefore be prepared with a couple of questions. Bad types of question to ask are: essentially selfish (e.g. asking about benefits, annual leave, sabbatical entitlement); ill-informed (i.e. things you could have found out for yourself if you'd spent a few minutes on the employer's website); or downright naive (e.g. "Would you say that the Research Excellence Framework is important to this department?").; Steve Joy is careers adviser for research staff in the arts, humanities, and social sciences at the University of Cambridge – follow him on Twitter @EarlyCareerBlog; Do you have any tips to add? Share your thoughts in the comments below.; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next university role? Browse Guardian jobs for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts.