Friday 4 October 2013 07.30 EDT	Eight priorities to improve primary education	In a recent speech, Cambridge Primary Review Trust chair, Robin Alexander set out eight priorities for primary education. Do you share this vision?	Back in 2004, a group of education practitioners and researchers from across the UK came together to examine the state of primary education in England.; In 2006 the Cambridge Primary Review (CPR) was officially launched and, after three years collecting evidence from research, interviews, focus groups, submissions and official data, its 31 interim reports were followed by a final report with key findings and recommendations. This called for quick political fixes and snap reforms to be replaced by a long-term, sustainable vision for primary schools grounded in secure evidence. The review then moved into dissemination mode, building a national network with 12 regional centres and generating interest in over 150 countries as well as across the UK.; The third iteration of the project has just been launched – the Cambridge Primary Review Trust. At its inaugural event last week, Robin Alexander, CPR's founding director, outlined the trust's eight priorities – forging in the process an alternative agenda for the reform of primary education.; Below, Robin Alexander describes his ideas.; You can also download the full speech online at the Primary Review website (PDF).; Child poverty currently affects between 17% and 26% of Britain's children, depending on whether you use the relative or absolute poverty measure, and poverty and social disadvantage impact directly on children's educational progress and attainment. Despite a long succession of government initiatives aimed at tackling the problem, most recently through the pupil premium, the challenges remain severe. There's a great deal that expert and inspirational teachers and school leaders working against the odds can do and have done and we must learn from them. But for their work to achieve its full impact, it must be supported by the country's wider economic, social and educational policies. All too often, such policies pull in different directions.; We must celebrate children's voice and rights in school and the classroom. As the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child points out, children should "have a right to be involved in decisions about their own learning". This influence should extend to pedagogy as well as school councils, for the classroom is where citizenship starts, and we know that discussion, dialogue and argument are very powerful tools for learning.; We need to sort out what primary education is for, and ensure that aims driving the curriculum and are not merely cosmetic. To say, as the government does, that the main aim of primary education is to make children 'secondary ready' is to undervalue children's huge potential for development and learning during the primary years. Education is about the here and now as well as the future, but schools should also address the wider condition and needs of children and society in today's complex world. Children leaving primary school should of course be ready for what follows, but what follows year 6 is life, not just year 7.; While primary schools must and do insist on the importance of literacy and numeracy, they should also lay foundations in other areas – in spoken language, science, the arts, the humanities, in physical, emotional and moral development and lived experience. These are in their different ways no less important for children's future learning, choices and lives; they might actually make children more "secondary ready" than the 3Rs alone.; The CPR argues against the old two-tier curriculum – where the basic subjects are covered in depth while the rest of the curriculum is in some schools treated seriously but in others is left to chance, and where the idea of 'standards' is confined to the 3Rs. This approach undermines the cultural and economic worth of the non-core subjects and flies in the face of research that shows how learning in one area enhances learning in others. Without deflecting attention from the importance of literacy, CPRT argues for a primary curriculum whose core includes essential knowledge, skills and experience drawn from all subjects, not just three of them.; It's only through teaching that the curriculum comes alive for children. And it's only through understanding the art, science and craft of teaching – from research, inspection and shared experience – that teachers can inform and refine their practice. Relying on habit or official pronouncements isn't enough. A greater focus on what evidence tells us about effective teaching and learning will enable teachers to help every child achieve the highest possible standard in all aspects of their education.; Where assessment and standards are concerned we need a wider practical repertoire and a more sophisticated vocabulary. We must devise approaches that enhance learning as well as test it, that support the curriculum rather than distort it, and that pursue high standards in all areas of learning, not just the core subjects. It's no longer acceptable that tests at a moment in time and in a narrow spectrum of learning are treated as measures of a child's entire educational attainment or of everything that schools aim to provide. Tests have their place, but both assessment and accountability should be about much more than test results.; Britain has immense demographic, economic, cultural and linguistic diversity, which creates a vast array of educational circumstances and needs. The best of our schools don't just work closely with their local communities but make the curriculum responsive to local needs and opportunities and live the very idea of community in their everyday work and relationships.; As recent events have shown, policymakers tend to be interested only in evidence that fits their ideology or prejudice, and they may ignore or even abuse those who provide evidence that doesn't fit the political bill. Deep and lasting improvements in our education system will be achieved only when policymakers are even-handed rather than selective in their use of evidence and when they speak about education in a way that exemplifies the educated mind rather than demeans it.; What do you think of these priorities? Share what you would change about primary education with us below.; Robin Alexander is chair of the Cambridge Primary Review Trust, fellow of Wolfson College at the University of Cambridge and professor of education at the University of York. A primary teacher turned researcher and writer, he initiated the Cambridge Primary Review in 2004 and directed it from 2006 to 2012.
