

Monday 22 December 2014 07.41 EST	Science and Innovation Strategy offers little New Year’s resolution	The government’s long awaited Science and Innovation Strategy materialised last week, but raises more questions than it provides answers about the future direction of UK research policy	On Wednesday morning, just as the university sector was beginning to digest the emerging results of the Research Excellence Framework, the government slipped out its new Science and Innovation Strategy. This had been originally scheduled to appear alongside George Osborne’s Autumn Statement, and expectations were running high for a document that had been talked up by ministers, and which had been the basis of an unusually broad consultation.; There was inevitable speculation as to why the document was delayed, and then published at a time when the research community’s attention was focused elsewhere. PR for the strategy was decidedly muted: for example, Tom Feilden, science editor of Radio 4’s Today programme revealed via twitter that BIS had declined to share the document with them so that it could feature on the programme.; At the formal launch event for the strategy, which took place at the Royal Society on Wednesday evening, Greg Clark, the new minister for universities, science and cities, emphasised a shared unity of purpose among the three signatories to the document: himself, Vince Cable and George Osborne. The reality of course is very different: at this terminal stage in the life of the coalition, relations between Osborne and Cable seem to have completely broken down, and this dysfunctionality affected the production of a document that was originally envisaged as a shared venture by HM Treasury and BIS.; These problems were exacerbated by changes in personnel. The departure of David Willetts, the government’s long-serving and highly-regarded science minister, in the July reshuffle, left a vacuum which his successor, who continues to juggle his old job as cities minister with his new responsibilities, has seemed reluctant to fill. Then Sir John O’Reilly, director general of knowledge and innovation at BIS, decided to quit early (or was forced out, depending whose account you believe), with his successor Gareth Davies not starting work until January 2015.; The big winner from this period of turbulence appears to be Sir Mark Walport, the government chief scientific adviser (GCSA), who is widely believed to have expanded his remit beyond scientific advice, taking effective ownership of research and innovation policy. Walport’s position has been strengthened by his close alliance with George Osborne and senior Treasury officials, including John Kingman, second permanent secretary, who as the son of the mathematician and Fellow of the Royal Society Sir John Kingman, has long been a champion of science’s contribution to the economy.; A couple of months ago, we understand that Walport ripped up the initial draft of the science and innovation strategy, which had been prepared by O’Reilly’s team, and wrote a new version, with the backing of Greg Clark. At the Royal Society launch, Clark alluded to Walport’s central role when he praised the strategy for having a “personal style, an authorial voice”.; Walport has studied closely the history of his role, and will be only too aware that he is now the most powerful chief scientist since Sir Solly Zuckerman first occupied the position in 1964. It will be intriguing to see how he balances the delicate accountabilities that come with this expanded remit. Already feathers are being ruffled: there are reports of heated exchanges with the boards of some of the research councils, who have objected to demands that they make open-ended commitments to new Treasury-backed projects like the Sir Henry Royce Institute for Advanced Materials in Manchester. All of this raises the stakes for the forthcoming review of the research councils, to be chaired by Sir Paul Nurse, the announcement of which was a surprise inclusion in the strategy.; So much for the background, what of the actual document? After the drama of its creation, reading the strategy is a bit of an anti-climax. There’s plenty of good material in there: it is hard to fault its diagnosis of the challenges the UK faces in maintaining its standing as a leading scientific nation. There is welcome attention to important issues such as internationalisation (though pronouncements from within the Coalition remain contradictory on this issue), women in science and open data. And tantalizing hints of new thinking about the spatial distribution of science, technology and innovation around the UK, and about protecting the research done by other ministries outside the ring-fenced science budget.; Beyond this, there is little that’s very new. As Sarah Main, director of the Campaign for Science and Engineering, said in her response: “At best, I was hoping for a visionary ten year strategy... This strategy is reassuring, but falls short on a number of specific commitments, such as a commitment to ring-fence the science budget or to set long-term goals for science investment.” The Cambridge physicist Athene Donald offered a similarly positive but lukewarm reaction here. Liam Byrne, Labour’s shadow minister for universities, science and skills was more sharply critical, complaining that “After weeks of waiting for a long-term plan we’ve got a short-term muddle…too many questions have sadly been left unanswered. There’s no dynamic thinking on how Whitehall can support innovation and we’ve still got no clue what the Minister means by ‘grand challenges’.”; Byrne is right to say that the strategy poses as many questions for research policy as it provides answers. To highlight just a few of these:; What does it mean for science funding?; The strategy says little about future spending plans, beyond what was already in the autumn statement, which set out how the projected £1.1 billion annual capital budget for science for 2015-16 to 2020-21 might be spent, informed by the recent science capital consultation (this period covers the next Parliament – and the next government may, of course, have different priorities). We did learn in the strategy that the new ‘World-class labs’ stream of capital spending is to cover UK subscriptions to international facilities such as CERN as well as bids for upgrades to university research facilities, and that government labs and independent research and technology organisations may become eligible for capital funding in addition to universities and research institutes.; However, we learned nothing about whether the protections put in place to maintain the budget in cash terms, and to prevent the science budget being raided by other demands within BIS, are planned to continue beyond 2015. There is a lot still to play for: as Andy Westwood of GuildHE argued last week, given that “we still await a HEFCE grant letter, a general election and a spending review, this is more like half time in the quarter finals…”.; Will capital spending be reconnected to the rest of the funding system?; Capital spending was taken out of the science budget by the coalition in 2010, and since then the way in which it is allocated has become worryingly decoupled from the rest of the funding system. Ministers have been using science capital funding to build science infrastructure in regions that do less well from the normal operation of the funding system, which strongly favours the Golden Triangle bounded by Oxford, Cambridge and London. But this risks creating ‘batteries not included’ research facilities: expensive buildings that may struggle to win ongoing funding from the normal operation of the research councils. In the strategy, we learned nothing about how the government intends to recouple capital and resource spending for science, beyond that this will be a matter for the 2015 spending review.; How can the competing objectives of rewarding excellence and supporting geographical rebalancing be balanced?; The strategy does hint at a change in thinking in its emphasis on the role of science and technology in place-making: for instance, in driving the growth of science-based clusters. This was also stressed by Greg Clark at the Royal Society launch, reflecting the cities strand of his ministerial brief. Traditionally, UK science policy has been blind to geography and has concentrated funding in those places where there is the greatest critical mass of ‘research excellence’ (whatever that means). In practice, this has meant strengthening further the dominant institutions of the Golden Triangle, at the expense of research-intensive universities elsewhere. George Osborne and Nick Clegg have both been keen to look at how science investments can support English regional economic development, whilst for their part universities in other parts of England have been scrabbling to play catch up with the ‘Northern Powerhouse’. What is surprising about all this is that politicians and science leaders in the other nations of the UK haven’t made more of the fact that the science capital budget from which these investments are coming is supposed to be a UK-wide one.; After the REF, is the dual support system under threat?; If, as seems likely, public sector austerity is set to continue for many years, BIS will be one of the departments under greatest pressure for more cuts. Reductions in the science budget bring political pain out of proportion to the modest sums of money to be saved, such that large-scale cuts are unlikely. But further reforms designed to make ‘efficiency savings’ are to be expected.; Despite a reference in the strategy to maintaining the dual support system through which the UK science base is supported both through grants from research councils and through block grants allocated according to a formula driven by REF scores, the latter stream – known as QR – is now felt to be the stream within the science budget at greatest risk. This was reinforced by speculation in the Observer yesterday.; One possibility might be to erode the value of QR over time as an ‘efficiency saving’. This, coupled with REF results which show the increased dominance of Golden Triangle institutions in terms of ‘market share’, raises the question of how the funding formula by which QR will be allocated in England (the devolved administrations make their own allocations) will be set. If the formula doesn’t change, the concentration of QR funding in the Golden Triangle institutions is set to increase. But if budgets are under pressure, policymakers may be tempted to tighten the formula still further, so that resources become even more concentrated. Noting that the Science and Innovation Strategy includes a commitment to maintaining dual support, seasoned HE observer Andrew McGettigan suggests an alternative option – the abolition of QR for non-STEM subjects. As QR is currently paid in blocks to institutions, this would be tricky to implement – but it could mean the end of the REF for arts, humanities and social science scholars. Either way, it seems odd that the strategy announced a review of the research councils rather than a review of the QR stream, which is the ultimate driver of geographical concentration, or of the entire dual support system?; What is the real purpose of the Nurse Review?; Despite the rather large distraction of the REF results, the science policy rumour-mill went into overdrive with the unexpected announcement in the strategy of a review of the research councils, to be chaired by Sir Paul Nurse, president of the Royal Society. It is only a few months since a comprehensive ‘triennial review’ of the councils gave them a clean bill of health. What has changed to make another review necessary so soon – particularly one that will be published in the middle of a 2015 spending review?; Some argue that what has changed is the key personnel. The more conspiracy-minded observers of UK science policy goings-on note that Sir Mark Walport and Sir Paul Nurse are close allies, having worked together (when Walport was director of the Wellcome Trust) to develop the £600+ million Crick Institute, of which Nurse will be the first director, and which will be Europe’s largest – and most controversial - biomedical research centre when it opens in Kings Cross next year, with some 1500 staff and an operating budget of more than £100 million a year. Walport is known to be frustrated with the research councils’ reluctance to fall fully into line with the Treasury’s vision for a new generation of flagship institutes, and some see the Nurse review as an attempt to seize more direct control of the research budget, for example by merging the seven research councils into a single body, or by top-slicing the council budgets for a new strategic fund.; One senior research council figure described the review to us as “an attempted coup d’etat in UK science policy”, though others welcomed it. There are also questions over whether Nurse is the right person to chair the review, given the vast amounts of Medical Research Council funding he will be hoovering up for the Crick Institute, and the extent to which the Crick would benefit directly from any ‘topslicing’ of budgets to support such institutes. Rumours of projected budget shortfalls at the Crick, and pressure being placed on the other research councils to pledge additional financial support, add grist to the mill.; Others see the review as a more benign and open-ended exercise, which presents a constructive opportunity to advance interdisciplinary research and cooperation across the councils, redesigning a model that emerged a century ago to better fit twenty-first century science and twenty-first century societal challenges. The terms of reference for the Nurse review have now been published, and are extremely broad. They include whether the balance between investigator-led and strategically-focused funding is appropriate; whether the divisions and balance of funding between the councils is optimal; and whether the councils should take greater account of regional balance in their allocation of funds.; It has also been confirmed that Nurse will have a panel to support his work. Ensuring a spread of perspectives on this panel could go some way to calming nerves, and it will be important to include representatives from the social sciences and humanities, non-Russell Group universities, and – given the tension between the UK-wide role of the research councils and the renewed interest of Westminster ministers in English regional economic development – all of the devolved administrations.; Is it a strategy for STEM or for all research?; At one point, the strategy underlines the necessity of deploying ‘all the sciences’: natural, physical, social, as well as engineering, the arts and humanities. But references to non-STEM disciplines are few and far between: in 71 pages, we counted just three mentions of social science (despite the fact that social scientists account for 25% of research-active academics in UK universities) and four of the humanities. This is a missed opportunity, given the critical importance of interdisciplinary research to tackling the economic, social and environmental challenges of the next decade. It is also surprising, given that Sir Mark Walport has spoken frequently about the importance of social science, and his recent annual report on innovation and risk, draws on a diverse mix of disciplines.; In recent speeches, Liam Byrne has been talking up the virtues of interdisciplinary research and the links between STEM and social science, so it will be interesting to watch developments on this front if he becomes science minister in a Labour government next May. The Campaign for Social Science will also be making a contribution to these debates with its report The Business of People, due to be published in February 2015.; Kieron Flanagan (@kieronflanagan) is Senior Lecturer in Science and Technology Policy at the University of Manchester’s Institute of Innovation Research. James Wilsdon (@jameswilsdon) is Professor of Science and Democracy at the Science Policy Research Unit (SPRU), University of Sussex, and chair of the Campaign for Social Science.; This post was amended at 16:13 on 22 December in order to correct a number of typos and to clarify the meaning of two sentences.