

Thursday 6 February 2014 22.55 EST	Griffith byelection: 'underdog' Coalition faces its first popularity test	LNP’s Bill Glasson urges local focus while Labor’s Terri Butler tries just as hard to make it about the PM and premier	Bill Glasson must be worried about the risk of Tony Abbott and Campbell Newman dragging down his vote in Saturday’s Griffith byelection.; The Liberal National party candidate reminds people that they will wake up on Sunday with the same prime minister and the same Queensland premier. In essence, Glasson implores people to think locally as they select Kevin Rudd’s replacement for the inner-south Brisbane seat.; Glasson is visiting West End’s The Three Monkeys, a cafe in one of the more progressive parts of the inner-south electorate that Rudd has held since 1998. He is accompanied by the federal treasurer, Joe Hockey, who likens the eclectic decor to a scene from Casablanca. Visitors play chess and read newspapers as they sip on their teas or coffees.; “It’s not about changing the government,” Glasson tells locals in an attempt to head off Labor’s characterisation of him as an apologist for Abbott and Newman’s budget cuts.; “It’s not about changing the prime minister; it’s not about changing the treasurer; it’s about electing the new member for Griffith.”; Hockey, one of a several senior ministers to lend their support to Glasson’s campaign, watches on in bemusement. “You certainly don’t want to encourage changing the treasurer,” he quips, prompting laughter.; The byelection triggered by Rudd’s resignation shapes as the first electoral test for the Abbott government, which has suffered a decline in popularity in opinion polls since it swept to power in September. Glasson’s Labor rival, the Maurice Blackburn employment lawyer Terri Butler, is favoured by bookies, pundits and history to win the seat. It has been nearly 100 years since a government has wrested a seat from an opposition at a federal byelection, leading the high-profile Glasson to claim the cherished “underdog” status. Still, Glasson requires a swing of just 3% and history is no guarantee of future results.; The LNP’s efforts to frame the contest largely around Glasson’s credentials rather than contentious national disputes are unmistakable.; Two hours after using a radio interview to declare the end of the age of entitlement, Hockey lauds Glasson as “a man of immense integrity”. The treasurer describes the LNP hopeful as forthright, considered, intelligent, “a giver” and potentially the best member for Griffith since the seat was created in 1934. Glasson is a medical doctor and opthamologist who gained a public profile through his past role as president of the Australian Medical Association.; But Butler’s campaign is seeking protest votes, based on the unpopularity of Abbott and Newman in the electorate. The last thing Australia needs, argues Butler, is another “rubber stamp” for LNP cuts. The Glasson campaign has countered with flyers in people’s letter boxes warning against electing “yet another Labor union lawyer” acting as a factional puppet. It comes amid allegations of misconduct involving construction union officials. Voters would be better off with a voice inside government that could influence Abbott’s team, the LNP argues.; Butler says the criticism is a bit rich “coming from the former head of the doctors’ union”, insisting her work for unions was aimed at achieving safer and fairer workplaces.; “In my professional capacity I’ve worked for almost every union,” she says. “I’ve worked for blue-collar unions, white-collar unions, left-wing unions, right-wing unions, I’ve done work for firefighters, nurses, administrative assistants, ambulance workers, traffic controllers.”; Butler introduces herself to voters at Morningside Central, a shopping centre near her home. As Butler talks about her campaign’s focus on being a strong advocate against cuts, a man walks past carrying shopping bags and declares: “You’ve definitely got my vote.”; “I should think so,” Butler replies. She explains that the supporter is her husband, Troy Spence, an Australian Workers’ Union official.; Rather than a debate over unions, Labor would prefer to focus on the government’s “commission of audit” led by the Business Council of Australia president, Tony Shepherd. The party has sought to draw comparisons with a similar exercise commissioned by Newman in 2012. The state commission of audit, headed by the former Howard government treasurer Peter Costello, sounded dire warnings over the state’s debt and deficit trajectory, providing political cover for Queensland LNP to pursue outsourcing and cut some 14,000 public sector positions.; Against this backdrop, Labor has latched onto a proposal submitted to the national commission to introduce a new $6 fee for bulk-billed GP visits, a tactic denounced by the prime minister, Tony Abbott, as a baseless “scare campaign”. The co-payment was advocated by Terry Barnes, a former policy adviser to Abbott when he was health minister, as a way of ensuring people valued the services they received.; Glasson told the ABC in early January that he supported “an affordable price signal” while stressing the need “to make sure it wouldn’t impact on the most vulnerable in our society”.; Butler says many people have family members who put off going to see the doctor – a situation that would only be worsened by a “reckless” new fee. She argues Labor is entitled to campaign strongly against the “GP tax” given the government’s refusal to categorically rule it out. Butler opens up about her father’s close call with melanoma that had metastasised. She says a friend who was a doctor suggested he needed to get it checked.; “Had that not occurred … he would have died,” Butler says.; “In 2007, my uncle, a person who never went to the GP, had a sore back, put up with it for ages; by the time they looked into it they realised it was a secondary tumour from cancer – a cancer throughout his body. He was diagnosed in January; he died in May and my aunt had to live through that. Now I don’t want to see any policy – and this is why I’ve got such a strong view about it – that makes people less likely to seek medical help early particularly not those sort of blue-collar blokes who already don’t want to go to the GP.”; Abbott, on the first of his two campaign visits to Griffith, stresses Glasson’s experiences helping disadvantaged people in western Queensland and East Timor with their eyesight. Abbott tells hundreds of LNP supporters at a launch event that he has “never met a man with better or purer motives for going into the parliament”.; The prime minister is asked to guarantee he will not introduce a GP co-payment. Instead, Abbott says: “Nothing is being considered, nothing has been proposed, nothing is planned.”; Glasson says he has a history of being “an extremely strong advocate in health” and would not be afraid of speaking out forcefully on issues he felt strongly about. When he was AMA president he worked with the then health minister, Abbott, “to boost bulk-billing”. Glasson says the medical model must protect the most vulnerable: children, pensioners, the poorest and the sickest.; “That’s our prime responsibility,” Glasson says after a shopping centre walkthrough with the communications minister, Malcolm Turnbull.; “Bulk-billing should reflect the needs of those people who can’t afford an out-of-pocket expense, so I’d fight tooth and nail to ensure that those people are protected. There’s no greater advocate of the Medicare system than Bill Glasson.”; The Greens candidate, Geoff Ebbs, describes Glasson as “personable” but says the minor party will again be recommending preferences for Labor over the LNP because of the Abbott government’s “shocking” performance, including on climate change and the environment.; Glasson led Rudd 42.2% to 40.4% on primary votes last September, but the Labor incumbent surged to 53% after the distribution of preferences, largely the result of Greens preference flows.; Ebbs, who attracted more than 10% support, says many people are ashamed at the major parties’ treatment of asylum seekers. “People are saying things like, I grew up to believe in hospitality; when someone knocks on your door you give them a cup of tea, hear their story and decide whether to provide further help,” he says.; Ebbs is having coffee with the former Catholic priest Peter Kennedy, who was ejected from St Mary’s in South Brisbane in 2009 over unorthodox practices and now leads the breakaway “St Mary’s In Exile” community. Kennedy says Rudd supported the St Mary’s-linked Micah Projects in efforts to combat homelessness, but his pre-election Papua New Guinea asylum seeker processing deal was “beyond belief”.; Butler says a regional solution is an “obvious necessity” because people will flee persecution while there is conflict in the world. She says she does not support policy settings that would act as an incentive for people to take dangerous risks at sea, but suggests Australia’s humanitarian intake is low by international standards.; “I think if you’re on the border of Syria and you have one of those mega-camps, you’d be looking at Australians and wondering what they’re complaining about when it comes to asylum seekers,” Butler says.; Glasson wants to discourage perilous boat journeys but says he is concerned about children in detention.; “They need to be processed as quickly as possible, I agree and, like the AMA, do not support holding children in detention centres because I think it is not healthy for them mentally and it’s not good for them socially, but we’ve inherited this problem from Labor and we’re trying to fix it up and we will,” he says.; Refugee policy is raised at an Australian Christian Lobby forum, as is same-sex marriage. Glasson tells the gathering that in the event of a conscience vote he would support equality “for all Australians”.; “I look at the issues of trust, love, commitment,“ he tells the 50 attendees at the Greenslopes Baptist Church. “You know I have people of the same sex come up to me just about in tears because they want and desire to get married. And I say to myself, OK, I’ve got strong Christian views but why should I let my views interfere with two people of the same sex who want to get married - not in a church?“; Some parts of the electorate are voting for the fifth time in two years after a run of federal, state and council elections. Several voters shopping at Morningside Central two days before polling day tell Guardian Australia they are unhappy about being sent back to the polls so soon. “I’m entirely sick of all the paper in my letterbox,” one shopper says.; A Norman Park resident says he is disappointed with Rudd’s rapid resignation but will not support the LNP because it is “going a bit nuts” at the state level. A Hawthorne man says Glasson is the best candidate and will get rid of the carbon tax (Abbott says people who want cost of living relief should vote LNP and send a message to the Labor leader, Bill Shorten). Another resident, Gideon of Morningside, will back Labor because of the Abbott government’s “horrible” environmental record.; The political commentator Paul Williams, a senior lecturer at Griffith University’s school of humanities, believes Labor will fall over the line, but it will be close. Glasson is “very well received” in the electorate but he will suffer from national issues and a lack of preference flows from parties other than Katter’s Australian party and Family First. Eleven candidates are on the ballot paper.; “There’s two massive competing forces here; no one should be surprised if Dr Glasson loses by 0.5% or wins by 0.5%,” Williams says.; Clive Bean, professor of political science at the Queensland University of Technology, says Glasson, a strong established candidate, might previously have been considered capable of “carrying on the momentum” after achieving a 5.5% swing in September, but the Abbott government’s honeymoon had ended quickly.; “I probably would have said a couple of months ago this case might be an exception [to the byelection trend]; now it’s looking like it won’t be,” Bean says.