

Monday 8 December 2014 05.55 EST	Chicago's Wall of Respect: how a mural elicited a sense of collective ownership	The Organisation of Black American Culture’s mural was short-lived but – online and in archives – continues to represent a powerful act of community-building and history-writing Neighbourhood murals: share your pictures and stories	What power do community murals have? This photograph was taken by Robert Abbott Sengstacke, a member of the visual arts workshop of the Organisation of Black American Culture (Obac), set up in South Side, Chicago, in 1967. Obac was a multi-disciplinary collective of artistic, community and intellectual practitioners active within the US civil rights movement. The photograph documents the Wall of Respect, a group mural conceived by one of Obac’s founder members, William Walker, and completed in the summer of 1967 – its eclectically styled sections painted by artists trained in different media, including painters, printmakers and photographers. The chosen wall for the 20ft x 60ft mural was that of a derelict tavern, on a prominent site earmarked for redevelopment, next to Johnny Ray’s TV and Radio Repair Service, South Side.; This community artwork combined multiple images to make a highly visible setting. It was created through a distinctly collaborative process. The artists and community debated and agreed a list of black heroes to feature in the mural, using Obac’s definition – “any Black person who honestly reflects the beauty of black life and genius in his or her style” – and who demonstrated originality and social consciousness for other less fortunate black people.; Local student Sylvia Abernathy’s overall design was chosen, with the spaces of the wall allocated to individual artists, and subdivided by the building’s features into different categories of hero. The wall was painted with a primer coat and the artists filled their sections with thematic portraits of African American figures: civil rights movement leaders and activists, sportsmen, musicians, dancers, writers and performers; as well as moments from the struggle against slavery.; New scenes were added as the Civil Rights movement unfolded. The wall became an important place for political gatherings, tourists’ pilgrimages, and other events featuring music, dancing and poetry.; The physical existence of the mural was short-lived, however, emphasising the contested nature of this site within the politics of Chicago’s urban renewal. For a time, fees were charged to visit it, and parts of the wall were vandalised. It was also a scene of violence, and the body of murdered community member, Brother Herbert, who had been prominent in the mural’s production, was left propped against it. After damage by a suspicious fire in 1971, the City of Chicago declared the site unsafe, and razed the neighbourhood. Today, it is a vast open space, with a commemorative plaque.; The Wall of Respect claimed an everyday surface as a highly visible celebration of black experience and successfully elicited reciprocal identification, and a sense of collective ownership, by local people. In spite – and because – of its destruction, this revolutionary act of image-making had profound influence in the neighbourhood, and inspired community mural movements around the USA and internationally.; Through such murals communities – often of oppressed peoples – collaborate and empower themselves to narrate identities and histories, making their political struggles visible and concrete. The Wall of Respect lives on, on the internet and in other archives, as a powerful act of community-building and history-writing through collaborative in situ image-making.; Ben Campkin is the author of Remaking London: Decline and Regeneration in Urban Culture (IB Tauris, 2013), director of UCL’s Urban Laboratory, senior lecturer in the Bartlett School of Architecture and co-editor of Urban Pamphleteer.; Mariana Mogilevich is a historian of architecture and urbanism and Mellon Fellow in architecture, urbanism and the humanities at Princeton University.; Rebecca Ross is a graphic and interaction designer and urban historian, senior lecturer at Central Saint Martins School of Art and Design and co-editor of Urban Pamphleteer.; Find out more about the project at Picturing Place.; Which other murals have played an important role in your neighbourhood or community? Share your pictures and stories with GuardianWitness or on Twitter using the hashtag #PicturingPlace