Monday 15 July 2013 14.15 EDT	Do Michael Gove's GCSE changes pose a threat to English literature in schools?	English academics say the education secretary's policy will mean fewer children doing English literature GCSE	The secretary of state for education is keen on English literature. He has a well known soft spot for Middlemarch, and spent a good chunk of a speech at Brighton College in May extolling the virtues of teaching Shakespeare, Dickens, Tennyson, Blake and Eliot to primary pupils.; But perhaps Michael Gove hasn't realised that if his proposed reforms to GCSEs go through, a great many children will never have the chance to read, in full, the complex, compelling and often difficult books and poems that make up our literary heritage – and contribute so much to British consciousness. English academics say that, as a result of the education secretary's policies, fewer children will do English literature GCSE.; Robert Eaglestone, professor of contemporary literature and thought at Royal Holloway, is one who makes that charge. He fears that should the Department for Education's (DfE) plans for subject content at GCSE go ahead unchanged – the consultation closes on 20 August – English literature at GCSE will shift to being an optional extra.; The danger is tucked away in the detail. Currently, all GCSE students have to study English. They can do this by taking English language GCSE and an English literature course, or they can opt for a single English GCSE that is made up of language and literature elements. So, whichever they choose, all children are introduced to at least some classic English literature.; Under Gove's English baccalaureate (Ebacc) structure, English and maths will be compulsory, and there will be three other subjects areas that children must study – a science, a modern language, and history or geography. If you want to do more than five GCSEs, you can choose from a range of optional subjects, including English literature.; The first concern arises because the compulsory English GCSE – one of the two non-negotiable courses – will be focused on English language skills. Eaglestone, who sits on two exam boards, says it is "principally a literacy qualification". Literary texts will be used, but only as a vehicle for pupils to improve, for instance, their ability in critical reading, comprehension and debating. These are all vital skills but, Eaglestone says, given that "no texts or authors are prescribed" and the exam texts are unseen, "it is highly unlikely that a novel or a Shakespeare play would be studied in its entirety". Teaching through a range of short extracts is much more likely.; The second concern relates to whether pupils will choose English literature. "If you are doing 10 GCSEs, you will almost certainly do English literature, but if you're only doing five, you certainly won't, and even if you're doing seven, you might well not, because it's been made harder," says Eaglestone. "When I explain this to other academics, they go white."; The English literature GCSE content, he notes, has been beefed up to include texts seen as tougher to grapple with than the existing material. These include a Shakespeare play, Romantic poetry, a 19th-century novel, poetry from 1850 onwards, and fiction or drama written post-1918.; Knowing that it's likely to be tough going, with no coursework component allowed and no "tiering" (which allows teachers to split pupils into ability groups within that GCSE subject), Eaglestone says it's easy to see why some students might opt out.; Though children have an "entitlement" to study English literature under the national curriculum, this is very different from saying it's compulsory that they do so, says Adam Barlow, president of the English Association.; And Barbara Bleiman, co-director of the English and Media Centre, adds that ultimately what all this means is that because "it's not core … the requirement to do literature has gone".; Eaglestone says the DfE has failed to think through the implications of its Ebacc reforms when taken in conjunction with the amended content of the compulsory English GCSE. He believes Gove should look again at the proposals.; Barlow voices another fear: that schools, acting rationally, will drop English literature as an option because of the pressure to score highly in league tables. "They will be tempted to play safe," he says. "I think there will be a number of schools that feel themselves released from the obligation to teach it."; At the selective Bourne grammar school in Lincolnshire, English teacher Carol Atherton is also worried. "For schools like mine, we won't make it optional," she says. "But for some schools, I can imagine that they will restrict English literature to top sets."; And Atherton says that while it could be difficult for maintained schools to make English literature optional, since they still have to fulfil the requirements of the national curriculum, academies are under no such obligation. "The shift to a much more text-heavy English literature course will make it more likely that some academies will prioritise English language," she says.; Bleiman points out that if children don't study any literature at GCSE, it's almost certain they won't choose English literature A-level. Even fewer will then apply to study English at university.; The result could be, says Eaglestone, to "send English – the most popular school and university humanities subject – into a rapid decline of the sort that has devastated modern languages and classics [university departments] over recent years."; Barlow says the importance of studying literature should not be underplayed. "English literature, as with all literature, is a way in which students, in particular teenagers, are enabled to ask questions about ourselves and about life," he says. "It encourages us to become conscious of being conscious. It's an explanation of what it means to be people."; There's still a chance for the DfE to rethink. Bleiman says there are two options: to integrate more literature into the core English GCSE course, or to bring English literature back as a compulsory element of the Ebacc.; For Atherton, it's about a child's right to have contact with worlds beyond their own. "Without it, you will have children who will be disenfranchised from not just classic texts, but also from more modern ones," she says. "Schools should be nurturing students' imaginative lives, and encouraging them to empathise with people whose lives are not like theirs."
