Saturday 23 February 2013 04.00 EST	Michele Hanson, Bamber Gascoigne, Diana Athill and others on going back to university after 60	The government wants pensioners to return to education because it will make them 'more employable'. Michele Hanson is unconvinced, but others can see the appeal	What an odd idea from David Willetts, our universities minister. He's suggested that the over-60 should return to education and take courses to keep their skills up to date, so that they can hang on to their jobs beyond retirement age. Or find new ones. And lucky pensioners – they may apply for a grant, which they will probably never have to pay back, because their pensions are unlikely to exceed £21,000, the amount your salary must reach before you begin repayments. It sounds almost too good to be true. Years of government-funded study to perk up the twilight of our lives. And I suspect universities will be thrilled. It will mean more income for them, now that they're losing customers, including loads of foreign students, because hardly anyone can afford £27,000 for a three-year degree course.; But then I read Willetts' statements more carefully, and found them worrying. "There is certainly a pressure for continuing to get retrained and upskilled," said he. That makes you "more employable". Upskilled? I suspect he's talking about IT skills. You wouldn't really "upskill" your history or literature. Doctors, dentists, vets, scientists and engineers have to keep updating their training as part of their employment, so he can't mean them. So if he is thinking that the over-60s should slog away at improving their IT talents in the hope of catching up and competing with the younger generation, who crawl to screens and keyboards straight from the womb, then he is expecting rather too much from us. Not that the over-60s are technophobic Luddites. I wouldn't dare suggest it. They are sharp as tacks. But the young have several heads' start, and how many jobs are there out there, in IT or anything, even for them? This week 1,700 people, including many young graduates, applied for eight Costa Coffee barista jobs in Nottingham.; "It just shows how hard times are these days," said the manager. And with all those desperate jobseekers to choose from, would he have chosen an upskilled pensioner? Unlike the Costa manager and most of the population, Willetts seems unaware that jobs are scarce. It isn't like the 1960s, David, when we pensioners were young. Then you could go out and get a job. Just like that. So we did. Most of us have worked all our lives, and now that we've retired, or are about to do so, we may feel that we don't want to incur huge debts so that we can work even longer.; Willetts doesn't seem to understand the over-60s, even though he's only four or five years off being one, and in the usual way of this government, addresses us in a rather patronising way, as if we don't know that "education is such a good thing … [and] there is great value in lifelong study". Lots of us are doing it already. I've been back to university in my 60s, to study early modern history at Birkbeck, and lovely it was, too. I thought it might help me to write a history book. Just a little dream of mine, and I hoped it might help me to hang on to my marbles for a bit longer. Luckily I could afford it, just, but that was nearly 10 years ago, when degree courses were much cheaper. My friends Nick and Nina have joined the Open University and are studying philosophy, child psychology and English literature, other friends are taking music courses at City Lit, the Mary Ward Centre and Morley College, some are taking local council courses – while there are still some left – in Italian literature, Spanish language, anthropology and gardening, and my cousin has joined the University of the Third Age (U3A). But none of these courses make us "more employable", and are of little "economic value". They're what our government seems to regard as soppy humanities, barely worthy of inclusion in the school curriculum.; If I wanted to start my history degree now, I wouldn't be able to. I couldn't afford to and I wouldn't get a grant, because I already have a degree, and if you have one degree, you can't usually have a loan for another higher one. Or even a lower one, like an HND. Either way, you're stuffed. So tough luck for my friend Jennifer, who wanted to take an HND in plastering and brickwork. According to the Student Loans Company, "tuition fee loans will only be available to students studying a first degree, topping up to a degree or studying an exception course," such as teacher training, architecture or social work.; I suppose that's better than nothing. But what if thousands of us without degrees decide to launch into our first one, but never pay off our loans – who is going to shell out for all those university fees? The poor old Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. It's going to cost them half the royal mint, and I thought things were tight in that department, as in every department. Wouldn't it be better if any available funds were spent on bringing back the educational maintenance allowance (EMA) in England? Because some of the young don't have a head start on us. Without the EMA, they won't have a start at all. We've had our go. Isn't it their turn now?; I noticed in an article about Willetts' idea yet another grim warning, that by 2033 one in four people will be over 65, creating an "unsustainable burden on taxpayers". We are absolutely sick of being called burdensome. Sending us back to college and encouraging us to take out gigantic loans that we will be unable to repay before falling off our perches, in a vain search for jobs that do not exist, and leaving the rest of you with the bill, is going to make us more, not less, of a burden. It doesn't take two brains to work that out. Go back to your envelope, Willetts, and try again. MH; What the Grown-ups Were Doing: An Odyssey Through 1950s Suburbia by Michele Hanson is published by Simon & Schuster. Available for £11.99 at the Guardian bookshop on 0330 333 6846.; Bertie Gladwin, 91, Britain's oldest student; I should be fronting the campaign to get older people to go to university. They ought to put me on a quango. I've got three degrees. I did a psychology degree at the Open University in my 60s, and that got me interested in genetics, so I did another OU degree in molecular biology. Then my wife saw an item in the local paper about an MA in security and intelligence at the University of Buckingham, near where we live. I had worked in wireless communications for MI6, so it was up my street. It was an intensive one-year course; I graduated last year. The other students were wonderful. It made a big difference to my life, which is pretty mundane at my age. But money is a problem. My course cost £6,000, which is a lot. How are people going to find £9,000 a year? It's a splendid idea, but won't get anywhere unless the courses are virtually free. And it's not realistic to think it will be a way of training for a new job. If you get a degree at 60 or 65, not many employers will say, "He's a good chap, let's give him a job." What's important is the benefit in terms of your mental and physical health. It keeps you in the world. I'm still fit at 91, and a large part of that is down to the courses I've done. It delays the onset of senility.; Al Alvarez, 83, poet and writer; Going back to university is a very good idea – even better for older people who didn't go in the first place – but it's not something I considered doing. Once was enough. The idea of going through it all again is nightmarish. I'd slightly messed up at school and was determined not to mess up again at university, so I worked very hard. I couldn't face any more exams after that. All I can remember thinking when it was over was "God, I don't want to have to do that again."; Diana Athill, 95, writer; There's already a University of the Third Age. A lot of people go back and enjoy it, though it's never appealed to me. I'm too busy. I feel guilty because they seem to be having a good time. I felt I knew what I needed to know. I did English at Oxford and had a wonderful time. I spent most of my time acting and falling in love, and got a bad degree. I was a totally frivolous undergraduate, but that didn't matter. I can recognise scholarship when I see it, and having a third rather than a first has made no difference to my life. University is the place where, in three marvellous years, you learn a lot about life. You can't replicate that when you are older. Older people who go to university do it because they have active minds and enjoy it. It's a chance to fill in gaps in your knowledge, and the time. When you are old, if you haven't got things to do, time can hang rather heavy.; Bamber Gascoigne, 78, former presenter of University Challenge; It's a brilliant idea. Even in my day on University Challenge some of the best competitors were those in their 70s. They were able to combine a lifetime of knowledge with their new academic skill. If you have the time and are not distracted by all the things that can prove distracting for the young, you can be a very good student. Ideally, people should go back because they love learning. I have two friends who, after a lifetime in the arts, are studying physics and chemistry, and are loving it. But perhaps, if we all have to work until 90, we will need to start looking at courses from a vocational point of view, as the young increasingly are.; Joan Bakewell, 79, broadcaster and former government 'tsar' for the elderly; This is an idea with a lot of potential. There are problems with funding, but it should be possible to solve those if there's enough enthusiasm behind it. Institutions such as the Open University and Birkbeck will come into their own. Older people have a lot of flexibility in their lives, and courses should be customised to what they want. People at 60 are young, healthy, probably have small pensions and might want to reduce their work commitments to a couple of days a week, so they could study part-time. It would enrich people's lives, and stop them getting lonely and depressed. The health benefits to society would justify the investment. I have a friend who is doing an Open University course, and she's taking five years over it, working intensively in bursts. I would love to start studying myself. It would offer scope for academics, too, some of whom are being laid off in the current economic climate.; Interviews by Stephen Moss
