Tuesday 12 November 2013 07.40 EST	In Praise of the Garrulous by Allan Cameron – review	A winning, welcome paean to the importance of being chatty	It is one of the more depressing developments of the 21st century – and Lord knows, there is plenty of competition – that not only are languages dying out at a terrifying rate all over the world, but that this government would appear to be encouraging the view that teaching any language other than English is a waste of time.; But we are living in linguistically anomalous times, and in an anomalous society. Even now, being a monoglot is not the normal condition of humanity. And it's just as well, for any number of scientific studies show that knowing more than one language is good for the brain. So, as Allan Cameron says in this engaging polemic: "The process of homogenisation we call globalisation is not only damaging our external environment, but our internal one as well."; Cameron's book first came out in 2008, published by a small independent press, who have now released it again. It is garlanded with praise from Terry Eagleton, Eric Hobsbawm and John Carey, which is an impressive roster, and all the more so because Cameron, a translator, fiction writer and poet, is very much from outside the academy. This can be a mixed blessing. On the one hand, academics in the humanities can be the pious guardians of their own professed disciplines, and regard unsolicited attempts to muscle in on their turf as, at best, the charming but easily patronised burblings of an uninitiate, or, at worst, akin to the crazed word-salad that scientists get in the form of unsolicited exercise books describing, in green ink, a perpetual motion device or unified field theory. On the other hand, academics can be impenetrable jobsworths with a reluctance to entertain new ideas.; In Praise of Garrulousness will not, I fear, appease the academy. It is rather difficult to summarise, as it goes all over the shop, from the subtleties and complexities of so-called "primitive" languages to hack printers of the 16th century. Also, each chapter begins with an italicised composition by the author, in verse or prose, and one of the poems is so bad that I was tempted to put the book down for good. But while it may have suffered as poetry, it had one very interesting idea in it: that power employs others to do its thinking for it. (Cameron is fond of saying "power" where we might say "the powerful".) Central to the book, then – if I may try to find a theme that links the various bees buzzing around in Cameron's bonnet – is the notion that it is in the interests of the powerful to reduce their subjects to silence, as garrulousness is the normal condition of humanity, the indicator of an equal society. You don't get chatty with a king; and the king, in his turn, cannot open up to anyone else, because he outranks them all.; The book expands on this idea, and Cameron thinks there's no harm in including anything that pops into his head, even to the point where he can look like a crank. I can imagine some evolutionary theorists shaking their heads at some of his pronouncements, but then he wins you back with a moment of great historical relevance (such as St Cyril of Alexandria having the philosopher Hypatia burned to death along with her books), or insight, or sly good humour: "Like most Scots, I do not believe that my country and its climate are very suited to human habitation, but the inventiveness of past generations has rendered it quite acceptable and occasionally even pleasant."; On the whole, there is so much here that is important (I love his description of writing as "pondered garrulousness"), and his humanity is so winning and welcome, that we can forgive the occasional battiness – after all, it is only a facet of the talkativeness he considers so vital. "Talking, listening, reading and writing add little to our GDP, but a great deal to our wellbeing."
