Monday 14 October 2013 15.59 EDT	Unqualified disasters in education policy		Dominic Cummings is "arguably the most brilliant" special adviser in the coalition, we are told. Yet he has no experience of teaching or qualifications in education. Would we want a "brilliant teacher" deciding transport policy or a "superb engineer" deciding health policies?; From what is quoted of Mr Cummings' views (Outgoing adviser pushes Gove to wield axe – and stop worrying about inequality, 12 October), they seem more driven by belief that the market is always best and that "private rules". Many people not labelled brilliant spout these canards.; Nor is what we are told he believes about the genetic basis of performance accurate. Research shows that about 70% of a child's attainment in tests (if that equals performance) is determined by their attainment last time they were tested, going back to starting school. Other factors influencing performance are gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic circumstances etc. This does not show that the 70% is genetically determined, as Mr Cummings ought to know. A great deal of the brain is wired in the earliest years of life in response to experiences. Therefore it ought to be possible to improve "performance" of children by supplementing the richness of their early experiences.; It seems a degree in history, even a brilliant one, has not equipped Mr Cummings with a depth of understanding of the interpretation of statistics or the nuances of educational research. Interestingly, he appears to concede that academies aren't making much difference (in spite of money lavished on them) and seems content to see free schools fail (that's the market). So why is it disgraceful for a local authority school to fall short? Graham Dunn Former director of education standards and inclusion, Lancashire county council; • Even if you believe that IQ is a measure of anything other than the ability to pass IQ tests, and that the variation within it is "primarily" genetic (a phrase so vague as to be meaningless), that doesn't prove anything about whether education can improve performance. Most myopia is genetic, but can be fixed with a pair of spectacles. However, the bigger problem with Cummings' argument is that it implies a view of education in which children are a commodity whose market value we should seek to maximise. Children are people, whose value is intrinsic; those of us who are merely "mediocre" in his view are still citizens with human rights, including the right to an education. Dr Jim Endersby Reader in the history of science, University of Sussex; • The epidemiologist Geoffrey Rose noted that if everyone smoked, lung cancer would appear to be a "genetic" disease. For sure, genes matter, but the heritability estimate, which is determined by comparing twins, is a function of the amount of variation in environmental risk factors in a population. Where universal education exists, genes will look as if they are playing a bigger role because there is less variation in the environment. Similar debates arise in obesity – presumably rightwing advisers aligned to the food industry will assert that the epidemic of obesity is caused by a shift in our gene pool, not a change in diet. Professor Matthew Hotopf King's College London; • Given that humans share about 98.8% of their genetic pool with chimpanzees, this implies, contrary to David Cummings' assertion, that there is much to be gained from teaching. Furthermore, if teaching is about bringing children to their full potential, the prevailing orthodoxy of league tables may be considered inferior to measuring the extent to which schools maximise the potential of each child in their care. Improvement is a relative concept and one which is being lost in this war of the ideologues.; Ultimately, the biggest conceptual problem with education in this country is the adherence to the 3Rs. There is a fourth R – reasoning. Teachers know, but politicians and their advisers deny, that the ability to think is as important as the ability to read, write and count. Ah, but to have a nation of people able to think well – where would that get us? Martin Jones New Barnet, Hertfordshire; • I spent part of the 1990s in Canada, where education was a sought-after profession that attracted and retained excellent teachers, in part because teaching was both reasonably well paid and realistically doable. Instead of expecting primary teachers to cover not only literacy and numeracy as well as science and the humanities but also music, drama and PE, there were specialists who took on these roles, including small-group activities for "gifted" children as well as for those who needed help in maths and reading. School counsellors were standard, and there was also a large and well-used library in every elementary school. My son was disconcerted when we moved back to the UK, and found that the "library" in his new primary school ("excellent", according to Ofsted) was a small bookcase halfway down a corridor.; Canada's highly educated workforce is a major contributor to the economic health of the nation. Education is a life-long process, with opportunities to acquire degrees in a modular fashion over the lifetime, increasing social mobility and offering opportunities even to those who got a poor start.; Dominic Cummings is right – we don't need to "reinvent the wheel". Education isn't really that difficult, but it does need to be not just a political priority but an economic one. Pay teachers better, and pay more of them. Standards will then rise. Elizabeth Liddle Clifton Village, Nottinghamshire; • As well as teaching experience and qualifications, for a headteacher's role Annaliese Briggs should have had substantial management training (Headteacher of free school appointed with no qualifications quits after seven months, 10 October). And, as she is to now take up a role as a governor, one hopes someone will give her governance training – someone who understands that it is poor practice to reappoint an unsuccessful headteacher as governor of their own school. Paul Griseri Middlesex University Business School; • Michael Gove's desire for more people without teaching qualifications to take over schools shows what an inspirational secretary of state he is. Perhaps the coalition should try this policy in other areas. For example, if lay people took the place of qualified doctors, nurses and pharmacists it would dramatically reduce spending on the NHS. The scheme would also decrease the population and thereby reducing spending in all other areas. Rosetta Delisle London
