

Thursday 1 May 2014 08.44 EDT	Prison service requires radical transformation		The Woolf report was not a landmark penal reform (The rise of the jumbo jail, 30 April). It was a liberal report that raised some issues in the wake of the Strangeways disturbance. However, the report was undermined on the day it was published when the then home secretary announced a raft of policies that were intended to strengthen the system of discipline and control inside, rather than recognise the brutal conditions and violence that led to the disturbance.; Nearly 25 years after Strangeways, it is no surprise that the present government, and its Labour predecessor, is following a path that, despite the emphasis on the so-called rehabilitation revolution, is likely to intensify the desperate circumstances in many prisons faced by prisoners and staff trying to do a good job. Woolf failed to deal with a range of issues at the time, and it is that failure, as well as the naive but politically expedient policies pursued by successive home secretaries, that has led to the current dire situation. It is a situation that requires a radical transformation in the use of prisons in this country in order to avoid the possibility of further disturbances in the future. Professor Joe Sim School of humanities and social science, Liverpool John Moores University; • I was interested to read Billy Bragg's sensitive and insightful comments, along with his colleagues (Letters, 29 April). I have worked as a mental health professional for many years and practise as a psychotherapist. I recall working with a young man who attempted to hang himself with a metal guitar string. We set on a plan whereby he would teach me to play the guitar. I was never competent – even as a young man. However, it did allow us to bond through my incompetency and I believe we both benefited – perhaps because of my failure to learn a skill which came easily to him.; In recent years, I have worked with people who have experienced hardship because of life events and government policies. While low motivation is a barrier to change and well-being, I have found those with music backgrounds benefit significantly from a renewed sense of meaning and purpose permitted by an absorption in creative discussions about their chosen interest.; We need to have something other than contesting with life's difficulties to feel alive, well and productive. This may be achieved through art, poetry and music, in fact, whatever allows a person to feel purpose and a sense of personal value. I hope this contributes to the debate and thank Bragg and others once again. Dr Alun Charles Jones Visiting professor in psychotherapy, Chester University; • So Chris Grayling aims to cut the cost of prisons, ignoring the adverse reports of the G4S prison (Report, 30 April). There is a way of reducing the cost of prison and reducing reoffending rates: stop short-term sentences. Many prisoners have no education, little home life, and no job. They come and go to prison through swinging doors. Prison staff cannot provide education in short-term situations. Individuals leave prison no more likely to succeed than they were. Community service teaches them something and gives them an opportunity to avoid another prison term. Eric Depper Stakeford, Northumberland; • The justice secretary, Chris Grayling, describes the ban on books being sent to prisoners as a vital security measure (Former political prisoners fight book ban, 23 April). The apartheid government, an extremely security-conscious regime, allowed me (and others) to receive books while serving a term in the 1960s for opposition to its policies. As a result I obtained a degree by correspondence, which led to my being allowed to study for a second degree at St Catherine's College, Oxford – a step on the way to a happy and useful career as a university lecturer in Liverpool.; Apart from that, the worlds created by Jane Austen, George Eliot, Elizabeth Gaskell, Charles Dickens, DH Lawrence, Henry James and many others made five years endurable. I know others benefitted too. Some books were refused us by security, but that was rare. Is the coalition aiming to make the UK prison system more reactionary than apartheid's or contemporary Russia's? Or is it that Grayling fears prison monitors will be unable to spot a hacksaw, syringe or cannabis leaf slipped into a copy of a innocent-seeming novel? David Evans Wallasey, Wirral