

Wednesday 21 May 2014 10.47 EDT	Andrew W.K. confirmed as a guest lecturer for The Oxford Union	Titled Andrew W.K. and The Philosophy of Partying, the Californian rock star will discuss his signature message of 'positive power and celebratory self-confidence' • Andrew WK: 'Music is a healing powerball of electric joy'	Andrew W.K., long time purveyor of partying hard, has been confirmed to speak as a guest lecturer for the world’s most prestigious debating society, The Oxford Union.; Titled Andrew W.K. and The Philosophy of Partying, the lecture will take place on 13 June 2014 and will "discuss his signature message of positive power and celebratory self-confidence," according to a press release.; “We've seen rock stars, we've seen brilliant public speakers, but rarely are they the same person, and rarely do they have as intriguing and broad a background as Andrew W.K.," said a spokesperson from the Oxford University Rock Society.; While W.K. is best known for his rollocking rock music, the 35-year-old has previously lent the wisdom of his "positive party message" to universities such as Harvard and Yale, NYU and Carnegie Mellon - not to mention non-academic events like the My Little Pony convention.; Aside from his motivational talks, he is the international musical ambassador for the 2012 World Snowboarding Championship in Oslo and is currently finishing work on his first full-length non-fiction philosophy book, The Party Bible.; "Most people tell you there are certain moments you should celebrate in life. For example, the weekend coming so you should party on a Friday. Or your birthday or New Year's Eve," Andrew W.K. told the Guardian of his partying philosophy in 2012. "But what if you're excited about being alive every day? Can't you be in that celebratory state every moment you're not dead? That became my theory and it became my mission to prove you can party every day."; From global leaders to Kermit The Frog and Katie Price - the Union has hosted debates from a diverse range of influential figures. Andrew W.K. joins a longlist of musical speakers, such as Jon Bon Jovi, Barry White, Dizzee Rascal and Shakira.; “In my opinion, Andrew is one of Rock 'n Roll’s great philosophers,” said Nick Fowler from Oxford's Humanities Division.; Andrew W.K. will headline the Truck Festival in Oxfordshire, as part of his Possessed by Partying tour.