Thursday 22 August 2013 07.05 EDT	Research in brief – 22 August 2013	Our weekly round-up aimed at showcasing the latest research across the subject spectrum at UK universities	• University of Leeds Skin cancer death rates are 70% higher in men, according to research. Findings show 3.4 men per 100,000 die from malignant melanoma each year in the UK, compared with 2.0 women. Of the 6,200 men who develop melanoma each year, 1,300 die from the disease, while 900 of the 6,600 women who develop it die. Julia Newton-Bishop, a professor from the University of Leeds, says: "Research has suggested the difference between the sexes could be in part because men are more likely to be diagnosed when melanoma is at a more advanced stage. But there also seem to be strong biological reasons behind the differences and we're working on research to better understand why men and women's bodies deal with their melanomas in different ways." She adds: "We also know that men and women tend to develop melanoma in different places – more often on the back and chest for men and on the arms and legs for women. If melanoma does develop on your back then it may be more difficult to spot." Sara Hiom, director of early diagnosis at Cancer Research UK, adds: "One of the reasons for the difference may be attitudes towards seeing a doctor. We tend to be reluctant to 'waste the doctor's time' - men are especially likely to put it off." Since the early 70s, male death rates in men have risen by 185% compared to a rise of only 55% in women.; • University of Southampton The 'genetics of sand' may shed new light on the evolutionary process, according to new research. Scientist Thomas Ezard used the fossils of microscopic aquatic creatures called planktonic foraminifera, often less than a millimetre, during the study. The remains of their shells now resemble grains of sand to the naked eye and date back hundreds of millions of years. This research opens the debate on the best way to understand how new species come into existence. Ezard says: "Because planktonic foraminifera have been around for many millions of years and rocks containing groups of their species can be dated precisely, we can use their fossils to see evidence of how species evolve over time. We can also see how differences between individual members of species develop and, in theory, how a new species comes into existence." He adds: "The controversial hypothesis we test is that the processes leading to a new species coming into existence provoke a short, sharp burst of rapid genetic change. This is controversial because it is very difficult to detect these new species coming into existence accurately without the fossil data; it is more commonly determined from assumptions made from the study of species alive today using molecular evidence."; • Universities of Durham, Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Bradford and Stirling / City University of New York The Vikings were not the first colonisers of the Faroe Islands, research suggests. New archaeological evidence places human colonisation in the 4th to 6th centuries AD, at least 300-500 years earlier than previously demonstrated. The research challenges the nature, scale and timing of human settlement of the wider North Atlantic region and has implications for the colonisation of similar island groups across the world. The Faroes were the first stepping stone beyond Shetland for the dispersal of European people across the North Atlantic that culminated on the shores of continental North America in the 11th century AD, about 500 years before Columbus made his famous voyage. Mike Church, from Durham University's department of archaeology, says: "The majority of archaeological evidence for this early colonisation is likely to have been destroyed by the major Viking invasion, explaining the lack of proof found in the Faroes for the earlier settlement. This also raises questions about the timing of human activity on other islands systems where similarly evidence may have been destroyed." Co-author, Símun Arge adds: "Although we don't know who the people were that settled here and where they came from, it is clear that they did prepare peat for use, by cutting, drying and burning it which indicates they must have stayed here for some time."; • University of Huddersfield An archaeologist has pinpointed the place where King Richard III met his violent end. For generations it was thought that the Battle of Bosworth took place at a site in Leicestershire called Ambion Hill. By analysing documentary evidence, reconstructing the historic terrain and undertaking systematic archaeological surveys using metal detectors, Glenn Foard – one of the world's leading battlefield archaeologists – deduced that Bosworth was not fought on the heights of Ambion Hill but two miles away in low lying, ground, close to a Roman Road and beside a marsh known later as Fen Hole. Research suggests that Richard III might have chosen this terrain because he was an enthusiast for artillery and on this flat ground it could be used to best effect.; • University of Hertfordshire People with mild depression have a more accurate perception of time, researchers suggest. Diana Kornbrot, research professor of mathematical psychology at the University of Hertfordshire, says: "The results of our study found that depressed people were accurate when estimating time whereas non-depressed peoples' estimations were too high. This may be because mildly-depressed people focus their attention on time and less on external influences, and therefore have clarity of thought – a phenomenon known as 'depressive realism'." Kornbrot adds: "Our findings may help to shed a little light on how people with depression can be treated. People with depression are often encouraged to check themselves against reality, but maybe this timing skill can help in the treatment of mildly-depressed people. These findings may also link to successful mindfulness based treatments for depression which focus on encouraging present moment awareness."; • University of Manchester More needs to be done in prisons to look after a growing population of older male prisoners, researchers suggest. Findings show 44% of prisons do not have a policy on the care and management of older prisoners and there's also a lack of integration between health and social care services. Jenny Shaw, professor at the institute of brain behaviour and mental health at the University of Manchester, says: "There seems to be ambiguity regarding the responsibility for older prisoners' social care. We also found that the geographical organisation of social services can result in the responsible social service being located a considerable distance from where prisoners are being held. In such instances, local social services do not co-ordinate their care." She adds: "Older prisoners have on average almost three unmet health and social care needs on entry to prison and the most frequent unmet need was in relation to knowing where to get information about their care. We are now calling for a series of improvements to be made." Suggested improvements include housing older prisoners near to where they will live when they're released, and a thorough health and social care entry assessment for all older prisoners which should be reviewed throughout their sentence.; • University of Bristol Dogs could help alert their diabetic owners of low/high blood sugar levels, a study shows. Researchers trained 17 dogs to alert their owners when their blood sugars were out of target range. The findings showed that all 17 people studied reported positive effects including reduced paramedic call outs, decreased unconscious episodes and improved independence. Nicola Rooney, lead author, says: "Despite considerable resources having been invested in developing electronic systems to facilitate tightened glycaemic control, current equipment has numerous limitations. These findings are important as they show the value of trained dogs and demonstrate that glycaemia alert dogs placed with clients living with diabetes, afford significant improvements to owner well-being including increased glycaemic control, client independence and quality-of-life and potentially could reduce the costs of long-term health care." Rooney adds: "While it is believed that dogs use their acute sense of smell to detect changes in the chemical composition of their owner's sweat or breath to respond to glycaemic control, further research is now needed to further understand how dogs carry out this amazing task."; Would you like your university's research featured on the network? Email claire.shaw@theguardian.com with your latest news.; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next university role? Take a look at Guardian jobs for thousands of the latest academic, administrative and research roles.
