Sunday 8 December 2013 17.13 EST	Higher education: caps off	At this time of upheaval, the merits of any reform on funding depend upon a plausible means of financing it	Student finance in England has got into a horrible mess. Loans are subsidised, costing the taxpayer a lot of money, and – as a result – the Treasury has rationed them. Some students who have the right qualifications can't get a university place. That is profoundly unsatisfactory for them, as well as for cash-strapped colleges who would like to expand to balance their books. As teaching subsidies in arts and humanities are eliminated, and with even core science, technology and maths subjects underfunded, cash-strapped is exactly what almost all colleges are.; So it is not hard to see why students and vice-chancellors alike might like the idea of doing away with that Treasury rationing. But in a country where George Osborne insists that there is no money left, it was a considerable surprise to hear the austerity chancellor announce last week that he was removing the cap. The costs are likely to be considerable: all experience suggests that where no limits apply, demand for higher education will surprise on the upside. Only last month, the Guardian reported that the failure to grip student numbers at the new private providers – which consequently soared to nearly 40,000 – contributed to a financial emergency that is forcing the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills to make savings that could hit poorer students. The autumn statement announcement initially concerns publicly funded institutions, but it will soon extend to private colleges too, as the magic (or, in other eyes, the mayhem) of competition is unleashed. At this time of upheaval, the merits of any reform depend upon a plausible means of financing it.; So what is the plan? The chancellor claims that extra subsidised student loans for the future will be financed by selling off the loan book from the past. In return for cash upfront, the Treasury will surrender the stream of repayments on these old-style loans, taken out between 1990 and 1998. This is PFI accounting – a scramble to flatter the books in the next year or two, at the expense of the public finances in the longer term. But it is stripped even of the usual PFI intellectual gloss, about the transfer of risk away from the public purse. It is like selling a house in order to rent, and convincing yourself that the cash-flow gain justifies living more lavishly than before. It doesn't add up, and the danger is that the books will ultimately be balanced by making students repay even more – or redoubling the recent assault on grants for the poorest students.; The chancellor is right to want to see more young people studying, although there is a separate debate about whether more general degrees, as opposed to more specialist training, are the best way to fill Britain's skills gap. But before Mr Osborne even gets into that, he should resit Accounting 101.
