

Friday 31 January 2014 11.20 EST	Coastal flooding threatens entire Welsh coast	University students moved from Aberystwyth promenade homes as officials set up evacuation support centres for residents	Residents, hoteliers and business people along the whole of the Welsh coast have been told to prepare for coastal flooding on Saturday as high tides coincide with gale force winds and a heavy swell.; Natural Resources Wales (NRW) said the flooding had the potential to be as severe as that which caused devastation in places such as Aberystwyth in early January.; Around 450 Aberystwyth University students who live in accommodation on the promenade have been relocated. Some have been given places to stay on the main campus while the university has paid train and bus fares for those who want to leave the area. Lectures on Friday and Monday have been cancelled.; Ceredigion county council is setting up evacuation support centres for anyone who has to leave their home.; Hoteliers remained stoical. Richard Griffiths, the owner of the Richmond Hotel on the promenade at Aberystwyth, said he planned to stay put and look after his property even if he had to ask guests to evacuate.; "I'll probably stay and make sure everything is all right," he said. "I'm not elderly or infirm. If the water comes in the front door, I'll be out the back."; Students were taking different approaches. Some were making the most of the university's decision to open the library 24 hours a day. Others were looking forward to the special events being put on by the students' union, including a marathon film session on Friday. "It's party time for me," said one humanities student, Liz. "We've got a four-day weekend and we're going for it."; NRW was urging people near the coast to be prepared for flooding on Saturday.; A spokesperson said: "Current forecasts show that a combination of high tides and strong winds could cause flooding on Saturday morning and again during Saturday evening. High tides and strong winds will persist into next week with a risk of coastal flooding on Monday morning's high tides.; "People are strongly advised to stay clear of promenades and sea fronts as they could be swept away by large waves or hit by debris. Natural Resources Wales' staff would continue to check that coastal and river defences were in good working order, clearing debris and working closely with local authorities, police and other partners to help ensure communities were prepared ahead of the weekend."; Emergency work to temporarily block a gap in the sea defence at Llanbedr, north-west Wales, was being completed. Since Wednesday, a helicopter has been positioning 500 giant sandbags into the 50-metre-wide breach to take the brunt of the tides and to stop the breach from becoming worse.; Ceredigion county council warned of possible problems in Aberystwyth, Cardigan, Aberaeron and Borth. Two leisure centres would be open in Aberystwyth and Cardigan for anyone who needed refuge.; The council said: "An increase in tidal levels can be expected around the entire coast of Wales but southern and western coasts, exposed to the south-westerly winds, are likely to see the largest waves as was the case during the high tides during early January."