

Thursday 22 May 2014 02.00 EDT	University of London plan to close Institute of English Studies condemned	IES supporters launch petition against 'sudden, arbitrary and ill thought out' proposal to split some of its work between other bodies	Academics from across the UK have condemned University of London's proposals to close its Institute of English Studies (IES) as a "direct assault" on national and international collaboration which threatens to "rip the heart out" of the biggest arts and humanities subject.; Some of its work, and that of the university's Institute of Musical Research, is to be split between other bodies under a plan by university administrators not to "salami slice" 3% cuts to state funding in the new academic year this autumn. The university says this amounts to a 5% cut in real terms.; The IES, based in the university's Senate House headquarters, acts as a vital research hub, say its supporters, organising 25 conferences a year, 40 seminar series, a visiting fellowship programme, summer schools and collaborating in major scholarly projects. Campaigners, who have has launched a petition on change.org, also called the move "sudden, arbitrary and ill thought out", coming a week after interviews for the post as new director of the institute were cancelled at the last minute.; Professor David McKitterick, of Trinity College, Cambridge, has resigned as chair of the IES advisory board, warning that the move would damage the university's reputation and called into question "its academic commitment both to the subject and to wider responsibilities".; Another advisory board member, Prof Robert Eaglestone of Royal Holloway, University of London, said: "This will rip the research heart out of English … It will seriously damage graduate training: the institute facilitates graduate students in building intellectual, professional and social relationships to sustain their research and careers. It will get in the way of the easy relationship between writers and academia."; Anne Varty, head of English at Royal Holloway, who leads the group against the closure, accused the university of "throwing away a jewel in the crown".; University English, the pan-UK body for academics in the discipline, is horrified. Its chair, Prof Susan Bruce, of Keele University, said: "We think that the University of London must have badly underestimated the esteem in which the IES is held nationwide, and the importance of its role to what is one of the largest subject communities in the country." The English Association, which promotes the subject in schools and colleges as well as universities, also expressed dismay.; The University of London said there was a "challenging backdrop of unpredictable funding" from the Higher Education Funding Council for England, which divides up state aid. The £8.5m awarded to it for its School of Advanced Study (SAS), which incorporates 10 separate institutes, was not enough to protect all of them. IES activities would be split between the Institute of Historical Research and the Institute of Modern Languages Research.; "Although this is very disappointing news, the university is proposing to maintain a large amount of the institute's core academic activity through the creation of new centres elsewhere within the school," said a university statement. "We are not anticipating compulsory redundancies. Recruitment to the posts of director of the IES and director of the IMR, both currently vacant, has been postponed. There are only a handful of administrative staff employed across the two institutes and we anticipate that, should the recommendations go ahead, these staff will be redeployed.; "At present, we cannot see a sustainable alternative, but we are actively pursuing other possible funding sources."; Campaigners for the IES argue it is not in financial trouble. But the university told the Guardian: "Any surplus generated by part of the university is part of the university's assets (or reserves) as likewise any deficit is also attributable to the university. Thus the IES, as one of the SAS institutes, has contributed, as have all parts of the university in different ways, to maintaining the essential university cash reserves.; "These cash reserves are deployed strategically to benefit the University of London, including the IES."