Sunday 24 November 2013 11.29 EST	US-Iran nuclear deal should open up academic exchanges as well	There is still a long road ahead, but the US and Iran are talking. Now the US should allow scholarly research in and about Iran	I woke up this morning in Tehran to news of the US-Iran nuclear deal. I keep thinking the honking outside my window is in celebration, but alas, it is more likely morning traffic. There is still a long road ahead, but there's finally a deal and, even more importantly, the US and Iran are finally talking.; I have spent the past 10 years doing research in Iran, treading carefully in the ever-increasing paranoid state that former president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad had created. I knew the risks involved in conducting academic research in Iran, especially after the brutal crackdown on the Green Movement in 2009 – students and researchers had been detained and/or interrogated, often in unpredictable patterns. Thus, I focused my energy on making sure that no one that I interviewed got in trouble from my writings and filmmaking and that I didn't cross any of the state's redlines in order not to bring unwanted attention from any authorities.; Until February 2013, I always thought that the biggest obstacle in the way of my academic research would be the government of Iran, not the US Department of Treasury.; Earlier this year, my academic work was put on hold for nine months, from the US end, not Iran. As I prepared to embark on a yearlong fieldwork trip to Iran for my dissertation research, lawyers at New York University (NYU), where I am enrolled as a PhD candidate, contacted my department and me. They had received calls from one of the academic granting agencies that was considering my application for funding, wondering if I would still be allowed to conduct my research under the current sanctions regime against Iran.; I was intimately familiar with the US sanctions against Iran and knew what I was and was not allowed to do in the country. Since I had received academic funding for my long-term research, I was in the process of gathering material to apply for a license from the Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). But I was in for a rude awakening: I did not know how difficult the new round of sanctions was for US academics.; Immediately, my research was put on hold. It took a long nine months and thousands of dollars that NYU spent on lawyers' fees to finally receive my OFAC license for dissertation research in Iran. I was extremely lucky as NYU's legal counsel was beyond helpful and kind to me while everything hung in limbo and they put together a team of lawyers to work on my case and ensure its success.; But I was dismayed to see that academic researchers in the social sciences and humanities were put under such scrutiny by the Department of Treasury. Iran has remained closed-off to the US for the better part of 35 years, and this policy by the Department of Treasury seemed counterintuitive, and frankly, detrimental. Although the current sanctions against Iran include an exemption for "journalistic activities", OFAC has not issued an exemption for academic exchange and research trips, and advises all academics to apply for a license. In my case, it took three months to prepare the application with a team of lawyers, and six months for the Department of Treasury to review and approve it.; Although my license allows me to conduct research, OFAC's policies on technology in relation to Iran severely limit my work. The license specifically bans me, and any other American academic for that matter, from taking a laptop, cell phone, voice recorder, hard drive, or camera with me.; Essentially, all the equipment that social scientists use for academic research is barred for a scholar going to Iran. Instead, I must purchase all of this equipment in Iran and then re-sell it before I leave the country. As for how to store my research material since I cannot bring a laptop or hard drive to Iran or back with me, I am encouraged to store my work on a cloud – a comic suggestion for anyone who has spent long periods of time in Iran, where internet speeds are continually toyed with depending on the political climate, and internet connections are far from safe and secure, putting in potential jeopardy your research material, and worse, the identity of your interviewees.; The US Department of Treasury should not limit American academics who conduct social science research in Iran. Our government should allow academic research in and about Iran, rather than create obstacles for scholars to conduct research on the ground. We should be encouraged to know and do more, not less – otherwise, our picture of Iranian society will remain a static two-dimensional image with no depth and complexity. There should be an exemption in the OFAC regulations for academic research, just as there is for journalistic activities, otherwise the current policy unfortunately limits the access to and exchange of information between scholarly communities. This is contrary to the spirit of the US-Iran nuclear deal.; As researchers, we should not be put in the position to fend for our right to conduct academic and scholarly work with both the governments of Iran and the US. As the relationship between these two nations takes a turn for the better, we should open up the academic exchange as well.
