Monday 4 November 2013 10.28 EST	Language Festival: how to get involved	How to take part in the Guardian and the British Academy's Language Festival • Full programme of events	November is languages month. Starting on Monday 4 November and running throughout the month, the Guardian and the British Academy are holding a UK-wide festival to celebrate the importance of language learning. The festival is packed with events – both physical and online – to provide a platform for schools, higher education institutions and businesses to debate and discuss the opportunities and challenges facing language learning.; To kick things off, there's a mini photography exhibition at the British Academy showcasing the multiplicity of languages spoken in London. The exhibition is open to the public (Monday-Friday, 10-12PM) throughout November. If you can't make it to exhibition itself, take part in our Guardian Witness assignment and show us which languages you speak. We want to hear from language learners all across the country and find out which languages you speak and why they're important to you. For those looking to get really stuck into the debate, there is a discussion on translation in a digital age on November 11. The panel of experts have been picked by both the Arts & Humanities Research Council and the British Academy. The event, held at the British Academy, is sure to spark some heated debate.; Outside of the main programme of events, there are a host of affiliate events happening around the UK. These events have been organised by schools and businesses passionate about languages. If you would like to organise your own affiliate event, we have provided downloadable resource packs with materials and inspiration. Do let us know if you're planning on hosting an event and we can list on the festival programme.; There is also plenty of activity happening online. On Friday 8 November, you can join in a live chat about the cultural power of languages. Our panel of experts will be discussing social inclusion and the power of languages to bring greater understanding between communities. You can also take part in the conversation at any time by using the hashtag #languagesdebate on Twitter.; And at the end of the month, we will be announcing the winner of our Language Champion Award, so stay tuned.; • Full programme of events • Downloadable resource packs
