Friday 20 September 2013 09.00 EDT	The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P by Adelle Waldman – review	The figure of the self-regarding Man-Child finds archetypal expression in a deft first novel	This summer, an essay published by the New Inquiry wildfired through Twitter. Moira Weigel and Mal Ahern's "Further Materials Toward a Theory of the Man-Child" is an excoriation of the "forms of crypto- and not-so-crypto misogyny" that have contaminated the supposedly enlightened worlds of publishing and humanities departments. The culprit: the Man-Child, the kind of self-regarding guy who "doesn't want to seem like an asshole", whose sexism is "ironic". Nate Piven – the exasperating centre of Adelle Waldman's deft first novel – is that theoretical man-child made literary archetype.; Nate is a young Brooklynite with a first novel in the publishing pipeline, a development that boosts his social and sexual status but doesn't do much for his soul. The book's title has the whiff of its protagonist's private affectation: it might more honestly be called "Nate's dates". Which is not to trivialise: Waldman defends dating as a human, and by extension literary concern, through the character of Aurit, whom Nate thinks of as "one of the smartest women – people" he knows. On one of their regular platonic dinner dates, Aurit's response to Nate's eyerolling plaint that "we might as well be on fucking Sex and the City" merits quoting at length: "I just hate the way so many men treat 'dating' as if it's a frivolous subject ... Dating is probably the most fraught human interaction there is. You're sizing people up to see if they're worth your time and attention, and they're doing the same to you."; Nate's world is circumscribed, as all our worlds are. It just so happens that this one – the predominantly white, Ivy League-educated milieu of Brooklyn's thoughtful and ambitious young literary women and men – is shot through with its own self-conscious ironising. I was reminded of the Twitter hashtag #firstworldproblems, which, in seeking to satirise its own myopia, only magnifies it. "Ooh, kale!" exclaims one character in a farm-to-table Brooklyn restaurant. "I could never find kale in Baltimore." But kale paucity is in a different class from the problems of the people Nate observes on the subway, people who share that first world but are worlds away from him: "He felt guilty [...] when, as the train moved deeper into Brooklyn, more and more white people got off. Eventually, almost everyone who remained was black – and tired. Overworked, underpaid."; With characteristic lightness of touch, Waldman airs one of the book's central questions – "Sometimes he wondered if he was a bit of a misogynist" – in the form of lazy daydreaming, a notion that occurs to Nate as he scrubs his coffee pot. He believes, solipsistically, that solipsism is something that only afflicts other people. Dispassionate and indecisive, he worries – although not too deeply – that there might be something profoundly wrong with him in terms of his ability to sustain relationships.; When he meets Hannah at the dinner party of an ex, a relationship begins which becomes the book's central love affair, although that word is used uncertainly and just once between them. Waldman renders its disintegration with wonderful subtlety. Nate doesn't quite know why it ends but Hannah has a better idea, accusing him of "wanting only what you can't have. The affliction of shallow morons everywhere."; George Eliot provides the book's epigraph: "To give a true account of what passes within us, something else is necessary besides sincerity." Nate may not be able to give us a true account, but his mordantly astute creator can.
