Tuesday 1 October 2013 08.00 EDT	What is primary education for? The Cambridge Primary Review shares its latest recommendations	Plus, what it's like to be a rare breed: a female vice-chancellor, and admissions tutors reveal the secrets of a good personal statement; all on our education networks this week	In 2004, a group of UK academics examined the state of primary education in England. Two years later the Cambridge Primary Review (CPR) launched and, following thousands of interviews and hours of research conducted over three years, key recommendations were published. It called for the quick fixes and snap reforms of government to be replaced with a long-term, sustainable vision for primary schools. The Labour government didn't like it, but it hasn't stopped schools in this country and across the world acting on the ideas.; The second iteration of the project has just been launched – the Cambridge Primary Review Trust. At the trust's launch event Prof Robin Alexander, CPR founder, fellow of Wolfson College, Cambridge, and professor of education at York University, was critical of narrow approaches to curriculum and assessment in England and outlined the group's seven priorities.; Packed with big issues and challenges, the list calls for a renewed focus on educational disadvantage and closing the gap; a broad and balanced curriculum that values humanities and culture as well as literacy and numeracy and for primary education to be about more than preparing children for secondary education.; On the GTN this week, we look at CPR's full list and open up the debate: what are the priorities and purposes of primary education? Join us to share your views.; Also on the network: Our inclusion expert, Daniel Sobel, writes about the four teaching assistants who have influenced his work. And, on the careers advice hub, we have tips and insights for aspiring headteachers from leaders that have already made the leap.; Kerry Eustice; The stats don't lie. When it comes to senior leadership roles in higher education, women are rarities. Just 14% of UK vice-chancellors are women, with only one of the 24 large research-intensive institutions that make up the Russell Group – the University of Manchester – being female-led.; So what's it like to be one of the few women leading a university? As part of our new interview series, Big on Campus, John Crace meets Janet Beer, vice-chancellor of Oxford Brookes University, to find out. Institutional sexism aside, John finds out about the relationship between Oxford Brookes and Oxford University, managing a multi-campus university, and how to persuade students of the value (all £27,000 worth) of a university education.; Also this week, Luke Georghiou, vice-president for research and innovation at Manchester University, discusses the pros and cons of global collaborative research. For some researchers, he explains, there's no option: "If you study volcanoes or rainforests, you need to travel." But changes to research funding overseas are providing challenges for academics. Visit the Higher Education Network today to hear what problems this is having for the.; Claire Shaw; In the latest in our series about how to write a personal statement, we've asked lecturers and admissions tutors for their advice on how to pen a stand-out personal statement to study medicine. Find out what they say online.; What's the point of school uniform? A student blogger asks whether wearing a uniform is a badge of pride or an unfashionable expense. "My uniform might not be what I would wear in my own time," she writes, "but it gives me a sense of belonging, takes away the pressure of what to wear and deters the bullies."; We're also talking about disability and graduate jobs and look at a new website that aims to help students with disabilities to get a top job.; Abby Young-Powell
