

Monday 16 June 2014 16.00 EDT	British values, multiculturalism and Magna Carta		I am an anthropology teacher in a west London comprehensive school, and in the midst of Trojan Horse issues in Birmingham I ask myself: what are British values? What do I teach my students to reflect them? I enter my year 13 anthropology class and look around. It's made up of students whose parents are from Morocco, Pakistan, India, Kenya and Mauritius; there is not a single purely English student. I am Croatian and a refugee from the Balkans conflict who came here in 1992. So, the whole classroom is, or was, immigrant. Perhaps the makeup of my school is specific to its location. All of my students are second- or third-generation immigrants or refugees. However, they are British kids who listen to all of the popular music, follow the fashion of teenagers and have the same issues as any other British teenager. But this is what makes it beautiful for me. This is, for me, what British values are: freedom to express this multiculturalism.; We, as teachers, are responsible for creating an environment with no judgments. Yes, all of us in my anthropology class have hybrid identities. My students and I perhaps eat food at home with spices from our original countries, or watch satellite soap programmes from our native countries, but when we are in my classroom we have something in common that allows us to communicate. Is this a British value? Why does it have to be labelled British? I am proud to live in this country and share norms and values that we all agree upon.; Teaching anthropology is easier with all of these different cultures in my classroom. We reflect and question the beliefs, values and norms that we are brought up with. Soon we realise there are simple values that apply, whatever cultural background you come from. They are respect, love and compassion. If these are British values, then I teach them to whoever my students happen to be. Tomislav Maric Teacher of humanities, Heston community school; • My grandparents all arrived in the UK at the turn of the last century, two of them fleeing from oppressive conditions in western Ukraine. Today, in my local French cafe, I have begun to learn what it means to be British (David Cameron joins calls for promoting 'British values' in schools, theguardian.com, 15 June). Following a strong recommendation from my prime minister, who heads a British institution he requires me to respect, I have started citizenship lessons with a reading of the Magna Carta.; I find the archaic language difficult to understand but I can make out some of the meaning. It is an agreement between a king and wealthy landowners or feudal barons, all of whom are men. They give freedoms to other men they recognise as humans like themselves but not to slaves or serfs. They are careful to limit the wealth and influence of women: by controlling marriage, particularly of widows, and ensuring women have no legal redress against wrongs done to them, except in the case of the murder of a husband. I suspect that since these circumstances are limited it is unlikely that women's views will be heard in these cases either. I know I'm meant to see the Magna Carta as an expression of British values but I feel that I may have to find a different code on which to base my ethics. Now, where was that reference to sharia law? Tony Booth Cambridge; • David Cameron has said that he wants the Magna Carta to be taught to children of all backgrounds as part of his fightback against extremism. Clause 39 of the Magna Carta reads: "No free man shall be seized or imprisoned, or stripped of his rights or possessions, or outlawed or exiled, or deprived of his standing in any other way, nor will we proceed with force against him, or send others to do so except by the lawful judgment of his equals or by the law of the land." Perhaps Mr Cameron should first consider a revision class on the principles of the Magna Carta for his cabinet members who promote secret trials, the use of secret evidence and terrorism preventative investigation measures, and the deprivation of the citizenship of British nationals while abroad, all of which appear to flagrantly violate clause 39. It would seem that many in government have also forgotten what it means to be "British". Fahad Ansari CAGE; • Owen Jones's argument that there are a range of values in our society, depending on where we are coming from, was a valid one (Sorry, prime minister, but your history is not mine, 16 June). His values are socialist, as are mine, but he failed to recognise that the historical examples he chose came from Christian origins. The values of John Ball, the Levellers, the Diggers, the Tolpuddle Martyrs (whom he didn't name) and the Chartists all spring from Christian faith. It is, of course, the true radical faith from which also emerged black theology, feminist theology and Latin American liberation theology, and is based on the fundamental Hebrew/Christian value that all human beings are equal in God's sight.; Hence as a "Christian country", which the prime minister seems to think we are, you cannot have values that allow the rich to grow richer, year by year, while their sisters and brothers are forced to depend on food banks. You cannot treat people who happen to be from a different country, a different ethnicity or even a different faith as second class. The poor shall not pay the costs of the mistakes of the powerful. You must not pay wages that people can't afford to live on. You must have health, education and social care systems that are collective, without privilege, and meet equally the needs of all. Owen needs to study history in greater depth, to know more of where he is coming from, and the prime minister needs to study history. Rev David Haslam Evesham; • In case Mr Cameron is unaware, asserting Britishness is just not British. Andrew Berkerey London; • As recent events have shown and as the Ray Honeyford affair demonstrated 30 years ago (Was the 1980s Bradford headteacher who criticised multiculturalism right?, 14 June), religion, politics, nationality and education constitute a dangerous and potent mix. There are no problem-free answers to how far schools should meet the aspirations of British parents who want a strong religious dimension in the education of their children. The current status quo is unsustainable; it was a fudge concocted in 1944 to appease the established churches and now long past its sell-by date. If it is retained in its current fragile state, there is no justification for obstructing those wishing to establish a large number of Islamic state schools; their fellow Anglican, Catholic or Jewish citizens have long since enjoyed that privilege. But therein lie dangers to social cohesion. The religious nettle is stinging and needs to be grasped. But that requires political will which was lacking 70 years ago. Perhaps the findings of the Opinium poll in the Observer, reporting almost three-fifths of respondents against state funding of faith schools, will give politicians the mandate and the courage to consider overturning that 70-year-old settlement in favour of a secularised school system which promotes universal humanitarian values. Professor Colin Richards Spark Bridge, Cumbria