

Wednesday 4 June 2014 13.16 EDT	Books do furnish a room – but not for much longer if Jeff Bezos has his way	The Kindle prophet's vision of a world without paper and its technologies will see the end of 500 years of culture. Hallelujah!	"Our vision," wrote the great prophet Bezos, introducing the Kindle way back when, "is that you should be able to read any book in any language that's ever been printed, whether it's in print or out of print, and you should be able to buy and get that book downloaded to your Kindle in less than 60 seconds."; This vision, hallelujah, is now all but realised. We are living in the Golden Age of the LCD, the Age of the Instabook, the End Times of Paper. By 2018, according to a report from accounting group PwC, the publishing industry will have been entirely tamed and bound, the ebook will have overtaken the pbook as our preferred reading device, and readers and writers will have been released from their paper-chained bondage. Each man his own priest; each man his own Kindle Direct self-publisher.; When pbooks eventually go – which they most surely will, brothers and sisters, for the prophet deems it so – what else will be cast into the fiery pits, into the abyss of the obsolete technologies of yesteryear, along with the typewriters, the linotype machines, the Gestetners, the mimeographs, the telegraphs and the hourglasses? Nothing less than the vast decaying infrastructure of all our paper-book dependent devices and systems. Yea, for these too will disappear; these too will pass.; Just imagine for a moment your home entirely cleared of its bookshelves. Imagine all that space cleared of you and your memories, your history. No evidence any longer of your foolish, childish annotations, your enthusiasms and errors, your indiscretions and idiocies, your brief flirtation with fantasy and SF, your well-meaning Pelicans and dark blue Penguins, and all those pointless Slavoj Žižeks! Think of all that room to hang artwork, and yet more and better networked digital devices.; My own house, I must confess, remains filled with no fewer than five freestanding pine bookshelves, of various finish and design; a waist-high Edwardian bookshelf, bought at auction, wide and deep enough to accommodate not merely books but also dinner plates and a decommissioned breadmaker; and a dozen "Billy" bookshelves from Ikea, poorly allen-keyed together. All dented, all broken, all sagging. But no more. No need. Hallelujah!; Imagine our high streets and shopping malls finally cleared of bookshops, as they have long since been cleared of haberdashers, greengrocers and watch-and-clock repairers. A few antiquarian and specialist shops will remain – a bit like the pathetic old gentlemen's outfitters one still finds tucked away down back streets, selling ancient striped winceyette pyjamas and panama hats. But no more cheap and cheerful secondhand bookshops, their produce stacked high, reeking of damp, stained and dog-eared by previous readers. More shop units available for pound stores and charity shops. (Or, if you live in London or the home counties, estate agents.); As for libraries, those ancient storehouses of knowledge, with all those poor people condemned endlessly to shelve and to store and to preserve paper books – gone, gone forever! Imagine Carnegie libraries, built like churches and now like churches decommissioned, transformed perhaps into light and airy shared workspaces for people working in the creative industries, with free wifi and Fairtrade coffee.; We have spent the past 500 years producing, consuming, collecting and curating printed paper books, but that time is finally coming to an end. You may pity the manufacturers of library ladders and card-catalogue index makers, and the producers of souvenir bookmarks, the editors of hand-stitched chapbooks, and the in-house editing and production teams at publishing houses, but the rest of us will rejoice. This is the age of digital humanities, brothers and sisters, of Kickstarter-funded bestsellers, of crowdsourced editing, and of boutique online publishing services providers.; There will of course be those who yearn for days gone by – the steam-train enthusiasts, the pony-and-trap brigade, the Age of Print re-enactors – who will meet together in muddy fields and exhibition centres to reminisce and pay homage at the shrines of the paper book, worshipping their Songs of Innocence and their Emily Dickinson fascicles, and their First Folio Shakespeares, believing that these relics, these fetishes, somehow bring them closer to the spirit of those who created them. But these are fanatics, these are fools – the paper book addicts, mired in ancient attachments, engorged with ink and imprisoned by pulp. The rest of us will be free.