Tuesday 19 November 2013 16.00 EST	Private colleges present the bill		It can hardly be a surprise that private colleges have rushed to expand their student numbers on the back of state-funded fee loans (College course subsidy spirals out of control, 19 November). This open goal has arisen from the government's decision to incentivise the higher education market by preferential treatment of private providers. While universities have limits on student numbers and are required to sign up to a national quality assurance system and an independent student appeals process, private providers have been allowed to operate and expand without such restraints and protections for students. The real tragedy is that students at private colleges may be prevented from finishing their courses. Meanwhile universities and colleges are likely to face further reductions in their already depleted teaching grant and access to HE course funding as ministers try to claw back the overspend. Pam Tatlow Chief executive, million+; • How we can have "over-recruitment" in an area that has no limit on recruitment is unclear, but, that aside, the problem is not with the private providers. Private providers, both not-for-profit and profit-making, are a positive introduction to the higher education sector. They provide quality alternative, and often innovative, provision and choice for students.; The government has actively pursued a competitive market place for higher education in Britain but this is now coming at the expense of social mobility and financial support for working-class students. This was predicted by the sector years ago.; The reductions in spending on higher education fall disproportionally on the funds for teaching and student opportunity, which are key to both the prime minister's and deputy prime minister's goals of a fairer society. What would make a difference is for the government to alter its course to ensure the parts of society who will lose out most in the current reforms are protected. Geoff Layer Vice-chancellor, University of Wolverhampton; • As universities minister, David Willetts has persistently advocated competition from allcomers on the grounds that this would sharpen the oldcomers. The colleges of further education, where most HNC and HND courses are delivered, are now for funding purposes private and so, in effect, business corporations, touting for business wherever it can be found. EU nationals who have lived in the UK continuously for three years by the September of the beginning of their HND/HNC courses are indeed entitled to apply to Student Finance England (soon to be privatised). So competition is running riot… Bruce Ross-Smith Oxford; • As a graduate from a poor working-class background David Cameron's words about the poor working-class of Britain having "low" aspirations make my blood boil (Report, 15 November). Over the past 20 years hundreds of thousands of "poor" people went to university on the advice of politicians to secure a future in what politicians called the knowledge-based economy. What about 90% of them actually got were huge loan debts but no proper graduate job.; The poor of Britain have always had mountains of aspirations and hopes for a better future. And many have worked hard for that future only to find more poverty at the end of the road to social immobility. We are also acutely aware of the high aspirations that greedy politicians have clawed for themselves out of Britain's crumbling economy. It is no coincidence that at recent general elections about 17 million did not vote. Paul Kilfoyle Cannington, Somerset; • Today On Wednesday 20 Novemberwe are taking action against the government's plan to sell off the student loan book before the next general election. As a secret report for the government has made clear (Money, 14 June), in order to make student loans more profitable for private companies, privatisation of student debt will be accompanied by an increase in the burden of debt placed upon graduates. This amounts to a retrospective hike in tuition fees.; We are building a movement on campuses across the country to stop this grossly unfair and unjust policy. Today's national day of action co-ordinated by the Student Assembly Against Austerity is just the start. Aaron Kiely NUS Black Students' Officer Shelly Asquith President, University of the Arts London Students' Union Sam Dathi Student Assembly Against Austerity Clifford Fleming Young Greens co-chair, campaigns and citizenship officer, Manchester University Students' Union Matt Stanley NUS National Executive and President, Midkent College Students' Union Amy Gilligan NUS National Executive Adnan Pavel Deputy president, London Met University Students' Union Fiona Edwards Student Broad Left and Student Assembly Against Austerity Marienna Pope-Weidemann Counterfire Kelly McBride President, Sussex University Students' Union Charlotte Bennett Women's officer, Midkent College Students' Union Barbara Ntumy NUS Black Students' Committee Tom Richards President, Norwich University of the Arts Students' Union William Pinkney-Baird President, Durham University Green Party Society Mostafa Culture and diversity, University of the Arts London Students' Union Rosie Black Activities and Volunteering, University of the Arts London Students' Union Hannah Roberts University of the Arts London Students' Union Tom Barker Socialist Worker Student Society at Durham University Miguel Costa Matos Undergraduate social sciences faculty representative, Warwick University John Beckingham Student academic representative, University of Chester Kate Hurford Black students' officer, Goldsmiths Students' Union Ben Hayes Goldsmiths College Student Assembly Against Austerity Lily Waring Gloucestershire Students Against the Student Debt Selloff Emily McDonagh Charity and fundraising officer, Essex University Students' Union George Venizelos Participation and involvement officer, Essex University Students' Union Harriet Pugh Humanities representative, University of Manchester Josiah Mortimer Young Greens National Committee Jasmin Lukasz Green Party Society events coordinator, University of Sussex Nick Devlin Chair, Green party, University of York Duncan Davis President Young Greens, Nottingham University Richard Mashiter Activities officer, Sussex University Students' Union Sophie van der Ham Welfare officer, Sussex University Students' Union Imogen Adie Communications officer, Sussex University Students' Union Juliette Cule Education officer, Sussex University Students' Union Emily Holliday Operations officer, Sussex University Students' Union Megan De Meo Counterfire Society, Liverpool University Hannah Ellen Clare Co-convenor, Young Greens North James Elliott Oxford University Ally Rooms, Tom Costerton and Ruairi Paton SOAS Student Assembly Against Austerity Tabetha Bhatti SOAS Stop the War Society
