Friday 2 August 2013 04.30 EDT	Clearing 2013: more courses for you to choose from	Last year was a record-breaking year for Clearing with more top universities entering the fray. This looks set to be another good year for applicants	Last year's Clearing round was more concentrated, and involved more potential students, than ever before, but a record number of applicants also achieved places – and this year's prospects could be even better.; More than 55,700 people gained their university or college place through Clearing in 2012, while another 1,329 gained a place through adjustment, the process by which those with better results than expected can try for a more demanding choice of institution or course. This was more than double the number that went through adjustment in 2011.; "A lot of applicants came out very pleased that they had found a place they wanted," says Andrea Robertson, director of relationship management at the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas). "It was a very successful year for them last year."; But it was a challenging one for universities. In the past, the number of applicants an institution could recruit was restricted. But, last year, there was no limit placed on the recruitment of students achieving AAB or above at A-level. With some institutions snapping up more of these applicants than in previous years, and with a fall in the number of A and A* grades awarded, others were left scrabbling to fill places, which meant some prestigious research universities entered Clearing for the first time.; "We hadn't intended to be in Clearing," says Cathy Gilbert, director of external relations at Birmingham University. "But there were significantly fewer AAB people in the pool, which meant we had vacancies we didn't expect to have. We put in Clearing helplines and open days to encourage students to come to us. We are building on that significantly this year."; Last year was also the first time students faced paying up to £9,000 in tuition fees. After a spike in applications to university in the previous year – as students spurned gap years to escape the fee hike – the number going through Ucas in 2012 was down by more than 46,000 compared to 2011, and by 43,000 compared to 2010.; It seemed prospective students also took longer to make up their minds about whether to apply, with around 30,000 fewer holding confirmed places a day after A-level results day than in 2011.; Gilbert expects 2013 to be just as competitive for universities, but says this is good news for students: "If you want to be placed at a good university, and have good grades, it's a great opportunity."; This year is less of an unknown because higher fees are now established, but there is a slight change: universities will be able to recruit as many students as they like who achieve ABB, slightly lower than last year. Students with these grades or above have a very good chance of getting an offer, while those with grades slightly below this are still likely to find course vacancies.; Robertson says there are usually spaces in every subject as long as students are prepared to travel and to act quickly. As a rule, vacancies in medicine and related disciplines, plus other vocational courses, are rare, while those in STEM (science, technology, engineering and maths) and some humanities subjects are more common.; While the most popular courses go quickly, says Robertson, some will still be advertising vacancies at the end of September, while there is an increasing trend for courses starting in January. Ucas currently lists around 370 of these and individual institutions list more.; But for most applicants, their futures will depend on a few days – or even hours – around 15 August. "It will be incredibly busy," says Robertson. "The period of time does seem to get shorter every year, and it is very important to do as much research as soon as possible."; However, students should remember that, while they are anxious to find places, universities are equally anxious to fill them.; Paul Tonkinson is an awardwinning standup comedian and TV personality; "I went to Northallerton Grammar school in north Yorkshire and had applied to do a degree in politics at Leicester University. But while waiting for my A-level results, I changed my mind.; "I'd never done anything dramatic, but in the summer of my last term at school I played the lead role in a restoration comedy – and I absolutely loved it. I was getting loads of laughs and people said I was a natural on stage. It was a eureka moment. So when I got my A-level results, I decided to apply through Clearing to do drama at Manchester University. I chose Manchester because a girl in the year above had told me it was really good!; "I remember waiting for the phone call and then I heard I'd got in, and it was amazing. University massively exceeded my expectations. I had a fantastic time and, two months into the course, I performed a piece of drama that I had written – and it was really funny. I remember being on stage and making people who didn't even know me laugh, and I was aware that, at that moment, my life had changed. I decided I was going to be a comedian.; "I made lifelong friendships at Manchester and some of us formed a theatre company that included Toby Jones, who is now a famous actor in Hollywood. I started performing standup comedy and I was earning money in pubs and clubs before I moved to London.; "I was lucky enough to hit London when the comedy scene was growing and I won New Act of the Year in the 1992 Time Out competition. I now do standup around the world and have recently been touring in South Africa with Michael McIntyre. My career has been, and remains, a constant delight, and it all started with a change of mind.; "To anyone applying to university now, I'd say follow your instincts and choose the subject you are passionate about – and don't be scared to take a risk."
