

Thursday 9 January 2014 06.43 EST	Follow two PhD graduates on their search for an academic job	In the first of a new series, Mel and Dean discuss expectations, anxieties and ambitions as they join the academic rat race	Age: 28 University: Bradford Started PhD: October 2009 Viva date: February / early March Publications: 1 Goal for this month: apply for 10 jobs that I'm qualified for; I have just finished my PhD in peace studies at the University of Bradford – and when I say just finished, I mean it: I handed in on Monday. I've always been academically minded, but I haven't always wanted to do a PhD. I enjoyed writing my undergraduate dissertation at Sciences Po Toulouse, and that's definitely when my interest in sociology grew.; But it was doing an MA in conflict resolution at Bradford that got me hooked on research. I became really interested in peace education and through that, storytelling and conflict transformation. I wrote my dissertation on it and I was left wanting more. So in October 2009, I embarked on an epic journey. Four and a bit years later, I have a thesis.; In the next couple of months, I'll have to defend my research at a viva – a process much debated and more than a little overwhelming. While anxious, I'm going to try and avoid the horror stories online and focus on preparing for it. Universities run workshops on how to survive your viva, so check out your own institution's website for details. And if you can't make the sessions, I have found the University of Leicester's advice very clear and useful. See the positives: I'm looking forward to meeting my external examiner whose work on narratives I admire, an opportunity I wouldn't get if it wasn't for the viva.; So overall, I'm excited about the challenges ahead. However, my experience, and that of friends, is that currently, it's difficult to find a job as an early career researcher in the social sciences and humanities. In October, I applied for a research assistant position. When I didn't hear back, I tried to get some feedback and was told that 160 people had applied for the same job. If you don't make it to interview, you've got to try and work out why for yourself, which can be daunting.; Through this blog, I hope I can share my experiences and reflections on the highs and lows of the process. I'm really keen to stay in academia, and my dream job would entail a good balance of research and teaching. Trouble is, in your final year, it's too easy to get engrossed in writing and forget about what lies on the other side of submission. So I have a bit of catching up to do. With just one publication to my name so far, my first task will be to devise a publishing strategy. Watch this space to find out how that goes.; Age: 34 University: Birkbeck, University of London Started PhD: October 2010 Viva date: 31 March Publications: 3 (+ 1 in review) Goal for this month: find a principal investigator willing to apply for fundingfor my research project; A few years ago, theoretical physicist Freeman Dyson articulated a vision for the future. He argued that we are entering an era of great scientific discovery, a new "age of wonder". As a young researcher about to leave graduate school and become (I hope) a professional scientist, my own personal age of wonder has recently begun.; For the past three years, I have been studying the most complex thing in the known universe, a thing that produced Hamlet, Lady with an Ermine, and Beethoven's 5th: the human brain. I want to discover how the brain and mind emerge and develop from infancy onwards, in both typically and atypically-developing children. I have measured neural and cognitive processes in over 100 children, the majority of whom had a neurodevelopmental disorder. Now I want to defend my thesis, have a celebratory pint, and find a job or funding to continue my research as a postdoctoral research scientist.; I returned to university after a long gap. My first degree specialised in defence and security. I wanted to be James Bond. But apparently it involves a lot of paperwork. So I decided to become a supervillain and set up my own company. In my spare time, I did a part-time MA in philosophy at the Open University and then a part-time BSc in psychology at Birkbeck, University of London.; At Birkbeck, I finally found something that I am passionate about – scientific research. I was lucky enough to obtain ESRC-funding to do (full-time) both an MSc in cognitive neuroscience and a PhD. My plan is to submit my thesis by the end of January and have my viva by March. My funding ran out three months ago, so I need to find work – and fast.; As I blog over the next six months, I hope it will help other PhD students and postdocs to form their own expectations, as well as comforting them with the fact they are not alone. I begin my journey with enthusiasm and fire for my age of wonder. However, my girlfriend sees things differently. To her, this is an age to wonder – about how on earth a guy like me is going to land a decent job.; There is an open secret in academia: many (perhaps the majority of) jobs in academia have been filled before they are advertised. This means we are applying for jobs that are not actually available. And there is another open secret, this one more difficult to prove: people prefer to employ women than men to work with infants.; Why is this a problem for me? I work in the field of developmental cognitive neuroscience; this often involves working with infants; and I'm a man. I don't know whether my suspicion is true or not. But together with the first open secret, it's going to make it harder for me to find a job.; My girlfriend (a PhD psychology student) is always right. But this just means she's due to be wrong soon. So, I shall cast her fears aside and stride out with confidence and determination. I will procure a job within six months. And first I shall make some tea and check my emails. Good news. There's a funding opportunity at Oxford ...; We'll be following Mel and Dean's search for a job over the next six months. Post any questions or advice you have in the comments below; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next university role? Browse Guardian jobs for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts