Tuesday 12 November 2013 22.17 EST	Museum of Words stunt fails to spell out case against arts funding	It’s not difficult to satirise the world of art funding but Charles Firth misses the mark and the point of conceptual art	Charles Firth appears to have got exactly what he wanted: fake controversy to promote his fake museum, with a series of news stories announcing the imminent opening of The Sydney Museum of Words, a two-week event to be staged in a gallery in Kings Cross from November 16.; Various famous people were asked to donate a single word – Vladimir Putin, Germaine Greer and Julian Assange among them – to be installed in the gallery. Supported by the City of Sydney and in partnership with Firth’s production company NewsLab and the Sydney Writers Room, SMOW looked like a project cooked up by some media creatives to take the piss out of the art world.; And so it was: on Tuesday, Firth claimed he had been sacked by his own company for claiming that $30,000 the project had received in funding from an undisclosed arts body was patently absurd because the SMOW was nothing more than a scam; a cover to raise money for the Sydney Writers Room, which doesn’t receive arts funding.; Firth, has form with this kind of cultural hijinks. The Zeppo Marx of The Chaser team, he’s the creator of some occasionally amusing piss takes, but the SMOW idea – to hang unrelated words on gallery walls and call it a museum – was really nothing special. As a hard-hitting satire of the art world, it was no big deal either, it had all the hallmarks of people who didn’t know what they were talking about.; For art neophytes, conceptual art is an obvious target since it lacks what most people recognise as craft skill or as possessing some intrinsic artistic value. But text art, a discreet kind of art that has evolved from its roots in the early 20th century art movements such as dadaism and surrealism, puts a high value on the audience's ability to recognise and understand a sophisticated and often satirical communication bereft of frills and bourgeois values of landscape painting and portraiture. The irony here is that Firth and his accomplices appear to misunderstand text art and conceptualism, two types of contemporary art that are in fact their allies.; Where Firth might have done damage is in the realm of arts funding. SMOW approached the Australia Council, Arts NSW, the State Government and the City of Sydney for funding. That they got it, is, Firth says, evidence that the whole arts funding system is rotten. “I think that what this exhibition, more than anything, shows [is] that the arts funding model is broken,” Firth claimed. “If something as fundamentally stupid as this can get funding from all levels of government then clearly there is something profoundly wrong with arts grants in Australia.”; But what Firth plainly doesn’t understand is his “fundamentally stupid” exhibition is nothing of the sort; there are numerous Australian artists who have staged exhibitions of text works, in painting, drawing, and sculpture. They have serious intentions and are taken seriously by the art world. Artists such as Jon Campbell, Robert MacPherson and Emily Floyd work out of the conceptual and text art tradition and, far from being dilettantes, they have long and substantial careers that demonstrate their serious intentions.; The big difference between Firth and those kinds of artists is that their work is offered in good faith. No matter how much some might believe that conceptual artists are frauds, and that their work is worthless, that it is offered in good faith is the last line of defence against the emperor's new clothes syndrome. Everyone is entitled to their opinion – no matter how wrong headed or misguided – but good faith is the protective armour against ignorance and disbelief.; It’s not difficult to satirise the world of art funding – a peruse through the annual reports of the Australia Council announcing which artists got what money for their projects supplies more than enough material. Plans to build a yurt or to buy a Segway or to stage projects of such little interest that only the artist and their friends will ever likely bother to see it – all of this stuff just lies in wait for any shock jock or tabloid columnist ready to decry the "waste" and "stupidity".; Firth has in one move belittled artists everywhere who apply for funding and most likely cruelled his chances of ever receiving a grant again. But there's a bigger point here than just his silliness and muddle-headed reasoning. In the current political climate, with the federal government flagging funding cuts for humanities research and a promise to find "savings" wherever possible, there's real threat that arts organisations that are the lifeblood of art-making and exhibition will get the axe. Stunts such as Firth's might give the federal government's razor gang exactly the excuse they're looking for.
