Saturday 19 January 2013 05.00 EST	William Dalrymple: a life in writing	There's a midlife crisis element to this book. I used to do a lot of this stuff in my 20s. But at 47, I didn't plan to get shot at in Kandahar'	On page 493 of William Dalrymple's new narrative of Britain's calamitous 1839 invasion of Afghanistan, he draws this present-day parallel: the west's "fourth war in the country looks certain to end with as few political gains as the first three, and like them to terminate in an embarrassing withdrawal after a humiliating defeat, with Afghanistan yet again left in tribal chaos and quite possibly ruled by the same government which the war was originally fought to overthrow".; That isn't how the government sees the situation, I tell him when we meet in London just before Christmas: the prime minister is with the troops in Helmand and defence secretary Philip Hammond has just told the Commons that the planned reduction of British troops in April "is possible because of the success of the Afghan national security forces in assuming a lead role".; How could you write such an off-message book, I ask Dalrymple. Even though he's travelled overnight from his farm outside Delhi to his publisher's offices in Bloomsbury, and left his wallet in India, he giggles amiably. "We have a very good record of defence secretaries saying clever things about Afghanistan. 'They won't even have to shoot a single bullet' – remember that? John Reid. I was on a panel with him last year and reminded him." He laughs again, and admits that the timing of the publication of Return of a King: The Battle for Afghanistan is not entirely fortuitous. "There was an element of calculation that this could happen – that they could withdraw some troops."; And is the fourth occupation of Afghanistan, featuring Hamid Karzai's western-backed regime, a debacle? "Well, Kabul is the safest place in Afghanistan by a long way. It's almost like a French finishing school – lovely-looking French girls working for NGOs and handsome-looking French archaeologists digging away. But when I was last there last year you couldn't go outside Kabul in safety. I wanted to go to the wonderful Buddhist monastery one mile outside the city – one mile – but couldn't. Jalalabad – you take your life in your hands. As you drive there, you see burned-out cinders of other cars that have been hijacked. Ghazni is so dangerous that I've never been there. And as for Kandahar …"; Dalrymple pulls out his phone and shows me a holiday snap from Kandahar. A single bullet has shattered a pick-up's rear window. "I was with a security company's driver out at the airport – fortunately behind bulletproof glass. A sniper shot to the back of the head. This is the driver," he says, showing me another photo, "looking chuffed to have met me." Why were they shooting at you? "Because we're an occupying army and they assume I'm intelligence or army up to no good."; Dalrymple has often run into danger researching his books. His first, In Xanadu: A Quest, was written as the recent Cambridge graduate tried to cross revolutionary Iran before getting thrown out. "You're meant to be shot at when you're 21." But not, perhaps, when you're a 47-year-old award-winning writer, leading organiser of the Jaipur literary festival, a visiting fellow in humanities at Princeton, and married with three kids.; "There was a mid-life crisis element to this book. I used to do a lot of this stuff in my mid-20s, before I had kids. I followed Tamil Tigers, got shot at in Palestine, shot at in Kashmir. I didn't do anything really dangerous like many of the correspondents of the Guardian, but enough to go back and tell some stories. "But this time it wasn't meant to be tricky. I didn't plan to get shot at in Kandahar."; Rather, Dalrymple was there to study manuscripts for his book. "The point was not to do all this Boy's Own stuff, but my wife Olive says she's never seen me more abuzz and excited by a project. Every time I came home from Afghanistan I was so thrilled." Why? "It's such a beautiful country and it's got everything I want from travel. Say you arrive in Herat" – Afghanistan's third city. "It's got umbrella pines like Italy, and the light of Anatolia, that very high, clear, gorgeous light. And you wander round in these beautiful 15th-century, kind of Agra-style, Timurid ruins and there's no one there, except some guy shooting up. Anywhere else it would be a world heritage site, it would be 25 quid to go in, only five in at a time and you wouldn't be allowed to breathe."; Return of a King isn't a book about those travels. Dalrymple abandoned that genre at the end of his 20s, after writing three books that made his name – In Xanadu (1989) following Marco Polo's journey from Jerusalem to the site of Shangdu, aka Xanadu, in Inner Mongolia; City of Djinns: A Year in Delhi (1994); and From the Holy Mountain: A Journey in the Shadow of Byzantium (1997), in which he traced Eastern orthodox congregations in the Middle East to their ancient origins and reflected on their relationships with Islam and Judaism. "With Holy Mountain I felt I couldn't do a better travel book. What I didn't want to do was endless travelogues – Africa on horseback or whatever."; Rather, Return of a King is a historical narrative for the general reader. In this it fits better with two later books, White Mughals (2002) and The Last Mughal (2006), though with a leaner, more compelling narrative line than either. "I see these three very much as the East India Company trilogy."; "In White Mughals – you don't want to over-romanticise it, but there's an amazing amount of intermarriage," says Dalrymple. "Brits are vaguely multicultural, not wearing pith helmets and disdaining everything. They're behaving in a way we don't expect the Brits to behave – they're interested in poetry and painting." White Mughals, or those parts of the book that deal with a love affair between James Achilles Kirkpatrick and Khair-un-Nissa, is set to be made into a film directed by Ralph Fiennes.; Return of a King marks the end of that era of Anglo-Indian intimacy and works as the middle volume of the trilogy. In it, Dalrymple confronts us with the aloof, murderous, British imperial sensibility that culminated in the high Raj of the late Victorian era. "This book is the Company going into neocon mode, wantonly invading and laying waste to countries on the borders, and then from 1857 onwards you've got the world of Kipling we're all so familiar with – decree from London, complete racial segregation and the Brits behaving according to stereotype."; His new book tells the ripping, albeit tragic, yarn of what happened when a complaisant British Governor-General of India, Lord Auckland, shockingly ignorant of the country he administered, was convinced by hawks (led by a proto-Paul Wolfowitz, Major Claude Wade, and a proto-Richard Holbrooke, Sir William Hay Macnaghten) to invade Afghanistan and reinstall disgraced ex-ruler Shah Shuja as a puppet, in order to save the jewel of the British empire, India, from imaginary Russian threat.; The consequences of this witless expedition – the bones of the last of the slaughtered British army still lie on the hill of Gandamak – led to a more vicious one, the invasion of the British "army of retribution" in 1842. That army's mission was to expunge the shaming image of recent British defeat, but the troops merely added to the shame as they raped, murdered, desecrated and pillaged their way through Afghanistan, committing a series of war crimes that Dalrymple calls a "dry run" for the even greater imperial atrocities perpetrated in India after 1857.; His view is that if the British had wanted to secure themselves against Russian invasion (itself a geopolitically barmy policy), we'd have done much better to court Dost Mohammad Khan, the pro-British, anti-Russian ruler of Afghanistan circa 1839, and keep him in power – a strategy recommended by the Scot on the spot, our man in 1830s Kabul, Alexander Burnes. That way, according to Dalrymple, we'd have achieved our fatuous ends without a shot being fired.; What few westerners know is the literature telling the Afghan side of the story – even though that literature has been central to the Afghan people's self-image as doughty slayers of interloping infidels. Taliban leader Mullah Omar in the 1990s styled himself self-consciously in the tradition of 19th-century Afghan heroes, Dost Mohammad and his fierce son Mohammad Akbar, rather than the seeming quisling of Kabul, Shah Shuja.; The initial conception for Dalrymple's book was to focus on the origins of the Great Game, or what the Russians more appositely call the Tournament of Shadows – the paranoid Russo-British rivalry for mastery of central Asia in the 19th century. Then he got to Afghanistan and was directed to Afghan histories of the conflict. Among the many Afghans who advised him was Ashraf Ghani, former finance minister, who, says Dalrymple, "retired in disgust at the corruption of the government. He's a brilliant, urbane Afghani of the sort who should be running the country – and an amateur historian – and he gave me a list of these texts."; Dalrymple stayed in Kabul during 2009 with British writer, ex-soldier and Tory MP Rory Stewart, studying in the Afghan National Archive and steeping himself in the great epic poems in Persian that memorialise Afghan heroics against the loathsome firangi (foreigners), as well as the Pepysian memoirs of Shah Shuja and an account of the invasion and its aftermath by Mirza 'Ata Mohammad, a soldier of Shah Shuja's who, embittered at his king's embrace of infidels, became sympathetic to the jihadist resistance. As a result of this reading, Dalrymple recast his plan for the book.; The published version is a racy tale of imperial misadventure and Victorian jihadism, but does something more important – namely what Robert Burns, cousin of Alexander Burnes, described as: "To see ourselves as others see us."; Dalrymple's version is, to put it mildly, a chastening read, especially if you're British. Dalrymple writes: "The British … are depicted in the Afghan sources as treacherous and oppressive, women-abusing terrorists. This is not the way we expect Afghans to look at us."; But why were the British so regarded? "They thought we had the worst possible attitude towards the women of Afghanistan, which was to turn the whole country into a brothel. What they disliked about us was our willingness to inflict civilian casualties, which is against Afghan notions of honour, and our willingness to abuse women and turn honest women into whores."; Indeed it was the shameful behaviour of the British during their short-lived occupation of Kabul – the double-dealing of Macnaghten, the sexual licentiousness of Burnes — that gave Afghan resistance to the imperial interlopers its momentum. "Burnes is particularly culpable," says Dalrymple. "There's a line that Mirza 'Ata says just before the uprising breaks out: 'Fucking a slave girl isn't worth the ritual bath that follows it; but we have to put a stop right here and now, otherwise these English will ride the donkey of their desires into the field of stupidity.'"; What's striking for Dalrymple about the British in Afghanistan is that we are forever donkeys riding into the field of stupidity.; He is now bereft. "There is that odd thing that, when you finish a book, you sack yourself from your job with that last full stop. It's a very melancholy moment, because you can't talk about everything you've been obsessed with. There's a limited amount people are going to want to hear at the dinner table about Lord Auckland and Alexander Burnes. It's like a divorce or something."; Dalrymple was drawn into this obsession in the first place in part because of a family angle. His great-great-uncle was Colin Mackenzie, who fought with the British invading army and later wrote an account of the war on which his descendant draws. "He's one of only two good Brits in the book."; Mackenzie's wife, Adeline Marian Pattle, was one of five Victorian sisters about whom her 21st-century relative would like to write one day. "Another was Julia Margaret Cameron the photographer. Another was Virginia Woolf's grandmother. Everything I wanted my family to be is in that amazing generation – it all goes to seed after that. They were partly Bengali – they had a Bengali grandmother – and they wore rakhis" (Indian bracelets often symbolising sibling love).; Dalrymple refers to the insularity of his upbringing when explaining why, when he encountered India, he fell hopelessly in love. "I grew up in Scotland and never went anywhere. My family lived in a beautiful house just on the coast near North Berwick and we would holiday in the west coast of Scotland once a year. And then through a whole series of accidents I ended up in India aged 18. It was like a lightning strike."; Perhaps his best books, The Age of Kali: Travels and Encounters in India (1998) and Nine Lives: In Search of the Sacred in Modern India (2009) are about this ever-deepening fondness. Admittedly, he spends two months a year in Chiswick, away from Delhi's summer heat, and when we meet he is just heading off to spend Christmas in Scotland, but he also moans about his family dragging him away from the beach at Goa where he was a few days earlier.; Dalrymple doesn't quite know what to write next. He takes out his phone again and shows me some photographs he took in Hyderabad, from a private collection of paintings of the 18th-century north Indian artist Nainsukh. It's the renaissance. The places where Nainsukh and his sons painted are like San Gimignano or Urbino – small, rival city states in the hills obsessed with high art.; "I don't know how to do it yet. I've got the landscape I want to explore, I just haven't got a map; I need a narrative."; That, perhaps, is what Dalrymple has always needed as a writer – a story to lead him through the landscape, a shining thread to draw everything together. It'd be a surprise if he didn't find it.
