Thursday 28 November 2013 03.20 EST	Bringing meaning to technology: PCR at 30	Technologies do not come to the world with pre-set meanings. Jean-Baptiste Gouyon explains how, over its 30 years, the Polymerase Chain Reaction has been defined by its users	Invented 30 years ago, PCR (aka Polymerase Chain Reaction) is a simple chemical process which enables anyone equipped with the appropriate machine, a thermocycler, to produce millions of copies of one single bit of DNA in only a few hours. It involves repeated heating and cooling of tubes in which the copying process takes place, enabled by a polymerase: an enzyme extracted from the thermophile bacterium. This copies the template of DNA and – unlike the polymerase found in, say, mammals – is not destroyed in boiling water.; When the PCR came out, it did not fill in a void, nor did it meet a particular need. In some quarters it may even have been met initially with some suspicion. Biologists from the School of Biosciences at the University of Kent, interviewed for the Chain Reaction! project, remember that some saw this new technique as a threat to established ways of doing things. Or that others tried the technique, moving tubes from cold to hot water baths a number of times, before considering buying a thermocycler.; But at some point during the last thirty years, a new phrase appeared in lab-talk: to pcr something up. The meanings are multiple.; Besides synthesising and amplifying synthetic fragments of DNA, the now pervasive and versatile PCR has been put to many uses. It serves to multiply existing genes, or to produce mutated versions of them at predetermined locations (a technique, specific to PCR, called directed mutagenesis). Lately, a new technique has gained currency in some labs. Called real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), it is about following, live, the level of expression of a gene. It can, for example, enable scientists to test whether a drug targeting DNA will enhance or inhibit the functioning of a gene. The machine becomes a surrogate for the cell.; More than a technique, PCR is a concept, that enables molecular biologists to think in new ways of their object of study, DNA, to ask genes new questions. Opening the way to new experiments, it literally frees the imagination. Some even use PCR machines as fridges. After all a thermocycler is nothing but an intelligent heating and cooling block. It can be set on 4ºC for 48 hours, to conserve the result of an experiment over the week-end.; The only limit to finding new applications for PCR is human ingenuity.; The Chain Reaction art show at Canterbury marks the 30th anniversary of the PCR. The six artists invited to engage with the PCR have come up with representations that each highlight different facets of a technology that has become so ubiquitous in today’s biological laboratories that it is overlooked.; Andy Birtwistle’s film emphasises the time dimension of the technique. A PCR can last for three hours. It also sheds light on the space where it takes place. Often the machine is left alone whilst it performs its task. Deploying the empty artefactual nature of a thermocycler on a photogram, Annie Halliday suggests that the tool is more than the sum of its parts. Stig Evans reveals the rituals surrounding the machine in a painting inspired by wears and tears visible on a decommissioned thermocycler. Sarah Craske and Tony Stallard both ponder on how the notion of mutation oscillates between source of evolutionary change and copy error. And with a collage Katy Price invites us to reflect on the centrality of PCR in some of the scientific myths of our time.; So many works, so many meanings, whose variety mirrors that of the uses and practices developed in relation to PCR in biosciences laboratories.; The indeterminacy of PCR was present from the start. Kary B. Mullis, who formulated the concept of the PCR (and received a Nobel Prize for it in 1993), was employed at the California based biotech company Cetus corporation, and saw in PCR a way of automatising and speeding up his lab routine, which consisted in synthesising artificial fragments of DNA, oligonucleotides, for commercial purposes.; As anthropologist of science Paul Rabinow shows in his book Making PCR, Mullis struggled to provide experimental evidence that his idea could work. The proof, as well as the demonstration of PCR’s usefulness besides the synthesis of fragments of DNA (in 1983-84, these were still seen as of limited utility) came from another lab at Cetus, devoted to the development of DNA diagnostics. There, two technicians with skills Mullis did not possess, spent several painstaking months trying to demonstrate the validity of the initial concept, and eventually performed the first successful reaction.; Past this stage, many older scientists suspect that, were they to operate in a pre-PCR lab, today’s postgraduates and post-docs would find themselves at a loss. Back then, isolating and cloning one gene would take months and could in itself earn you a doctoral degree. At present, a PhD student equipped with a thermocycler would only need a week to do the same.; From cancer research to DNA fingerprinting through to finding traces of horse meat in beefburgers, the story of the invention of the PCR and how it was appropriated in labs across the industrial world shows that it is its users who conferred meaning on the technology, and continue to do so.; The first of The H Word's two posts on the PCR anniversary can be read here. Chain Reaction shows at the Sidney Cooper Gallery, Canterbury, until 21 December 2013.; Jean-Baptiste Gouyon is a science and technology scholar and an honorary post-doctoral research associate of the Science Museum, London.
