

Friday 6 June 2014 02.00 EDT	Good medicine is realised as much through art as science	The Medicine Unboxed Creative Prize champions a less reductive, less consumerist view of illness and medicine – and the human fragility that underlies both	Good medicine is about more than a set of technical decisions or interventions involving drugs, operations and tests. It demands identification with another’s suffering, moral deliberation, wisdom and insight.; The arts can illuminate this view of medicine. But it is not enough to expose doctors training in medical schools to the humanities, and there's more to it than the idea of empathy being "stewarded" by the arts. Art does not simply tick a box within medicine. Good medicine is realised through art as much as it is through science.; The Medicine Unboxed Creative Prize reflects this belief, and looks to champion a less reductive, less consumerist view of illness and medicine, and the human fragility that underlies them both. Our intention is, in the words of Francis Bacon, "to deepen the mystery", by celebrating an authentic creative connection between art and medicine.; Since 2009, the Medicine Unboxed project has been bringing together the public, health professionals, politicians and artists to engage in a discussion about the values, beliefs, language and voices that inform medicine.; The conversations that have followed have been challenging, inspiring, sometimes funny and often moving.; In anticipation of this year's annual Medicine Unboxed event – Frontiers, on 22-23 November – we launched an arts prize that aims to amplify the resonance between art and medicine. This year the prize, worth £10,000 for the winner, has attracted 80 entries from around the world.; The prize is unusual in that it is open to creative works in any discipline. It is also unusual in that, instead of simply entering their work, we asked artists to send expressions of interest to help our judges understand more about them and how they engage with our theme of the interface between arts and medicine.; In this way we hope to understand, encourage and explore not just the finished creative work but the wellspring of inspiration that links the arts and medicine.; We also opened up the creative process, and the prize process itself, by following shortlisted artists on their path towards their final submitted work. Tom de Freston, one of our judges, will be creating a documentary that tells the story of the prize, the artists and their interpretations of medicine.; You can follow the prize, and the Medicine Unboxed project, at medicineunboxed.org. The shortlist will be published in July and the winner will be announced at our Frontiers event in November.; Dr Sam Guglani is consultant oncologist at Cheltenham General Hospital and curator of Medicine Unboxed. Prof Peter Thomas is COO of the Leasing Foundation and creative director of Medicine Unboxed