Friday 5 July 2013 05.58 EDT	Research in brief – 05 July 2013	Our weekly round-up aimed at showcasing the latest research across the subject spectrum at UK universities	• Goldsmiths, University of London Women know less about politics than men regardless of how advanced a country is in terms of gender equality, a study shows. It discovered that gender gaps in political knowledge tend to be even wider in 'advanced' economies such as the United Kingdom and United States than in less advanced economies such as Colombia. Professor James Curran, director of the Goldsmiths Leverhulme Media Research Centre at University of London, says: "The fact that throughout the whole world women know less about politics than men and that this is as true for people in Norway as it is in Colombia is really very surprising". Findings reveal that news coverage is heavily weighted toward male sources even in countries such as the UK and Australia where gender equality ratings are relatively high. Overall, women are only interviewed or cited in 30% of TV news stories in the 10 nations. In the 10 countries surveyed, female sources tend only to appear in longer news items or articles and are preferred for soft news topics such as family, lifestyle and culture. Co-researcher professor Kaori Hayashi, says: "Such underrepresentation and topical bias of women in news media may curb women's motivation to acquire political knowledge actively, and discourage them from political participation, and even prevent women from engaging in citizens in a democratic society."; • Northumbria University The vision for an independent Scotland and Scottish identity must include ethnic and racial minorities, a researcher has argued. In his study, Dr Nasar Meer, a reader in social science and co-director of the centre for civil society and citizenship, identified three dominant visions for where minorities fit into and remake Scottish identity. The first, aspirational pluralism, suggests that political elites in Scotland do not seek to place ethnically exclusive barriers on being a member of Scottish nationhood, meaning that they are open to ethnic and racial minorities laying claim to and – at least theoretically – changing Scottish identity. Meer says: "Politically, Scottish national identity is being configured according to existing conceptions of church state-relations, prevailing norms of 'civic' participation and inclusion, and implicit notions of 'legitimate' and 'illegitimate' minority claims-making, amongst other things. My research argues that political elites can play a vital role in ensuring that we do not rely on an assumption that these are self-evidently inclusive, but that they are meaningfully calibrated to include minorities too."; • University of Manchester A researcher has revealed a rowdy side to the history of Victorian and Edwardian public parks in the UK. Ruth Colton says children were central to the establishment of our parks which were places where they were encouraged to behave 'properly'. The Victorians, she says, thought parks were important for promoting social harmony, respectability and family values at a time of rising concerns about children's behaviour, health and welfare. But through postcards, public records, archaeology and children's literature from the period shows the children weren't as well behaved as we originally thought. Objects excavated in Whitworth Park show that eating food and drinking alcohol, forbidden in the park, took place. Colton says: "I don't agree that Victorian and Edwardian children were to be seen and not heard. It was supposed to be the golden age for middle class children, who were depicted as angels or fairies in advertisements and literature. But children and children's play was a prominent feature of parks and one which was framed by class. Working class children, depicted as street urchins, were given a less positive spin, but parks were thought to be a good way to purify and improve them." She adds: "And like today, there was a rowdy and unpredictable side too: while parks were supposed to promote social harmony, this was often resisted and parks could be sites of conflict and contrast. Newspapers reported that children and youths were sitting on park benches shouting abuse at passers-by. Children would also illegally fish in park lakes for ornamental fish or steal fruit of the trees."; • University of Cambridge / Fitzwilliam Museum The 6000-year history of the Afro Comb, its impact on cultures worldwide, and community stories relating to hair today are being explored in a new exhibition. Origins of the Afro Comb follows the evolution of the comb from pre-dynastic Egypt to modern-day, tracing the similarities in form and the diversity of designs found across Africa and the African Diaspora. The exhibition is a part of a legacy project to record how the comb is used today, with visitors being encouraged to contribute their personal stories and hairstyles both to the exhibition and to archives for future generations. Each of the hundreds of beautiful combs on display is a work of art, from pieces exquisitely carved in wood with tiny geometric designs, to works sculpted from ivory or inlayed with multi-coloured glass beads. The displays will include images and sculpture showing a wide variety of hairstyles illustrating how the combs have been used since antiquity. Cutrator Sally-Ann Ashton and senior assistant keeper of antiquities at the Fitzwilliam Museum, says: "This exhibition expresses the unity of archaeology and anthropology, where art meets personal human stories, observing patterns of change and continuity of this vital cultural tradition. Much of the work here has involved a very lively community of people, working with a diverse committee contributing both advice and pieces for the displays, including artworks and personal combs."; • Imperial College London / UCL / and King's College London Long-term cannabis users tend to produce less dopamine, a chemical in the brain linked to motivation, a study shows. Researchers found that dopamine levels in a part of the brain called the striatum were lower in people who smoke more cannabis and those who began taking the drug at a younger age. They suggest this finding could explain why some cannabis users appear to lack motivation to work or pursue their normal interests. Dr Michael Bloomfield, from the department of medicine at Imperial, who led the study, says: "It has been assumed that cannabis increases the risk of schizophrenia by inducing the same effects on the dopamine system that we see in schizophrenia, but this hasn't been studied in active cannabis users until now." He adds: "Although we only looked at cannabis users who have had psychotic-like experiences while using the drug, we think the findings would apply to cannabis users in general, since we didn't see a stronger effect in the subjects who have more psychotic-like symptoms. This needs to be tested though."; • University of Nottingham Research shows that exposure to a neonicotinoid insecticide causes changes in honeybee genes. The study supports the recent decision taken by the European Commission to temporarily ban three neonicotinoids amid concerns that they could be linked to bee deaths. Researchers identified that cells of honeybee larvae had to work harder and increase the activity of genes involved in breaking down toxins, most likely to cope with the insecticide. Genes involved in regulating energy to run cells were also affected. Such changes are known to reduce the lifespan of the most widely studied insect, the common fruit fly, and lower a larva's probability of surviving to adulthood. Dr Stöger says: "Although larvae can still grow and develop in the presence of imidacloprid, the stability of the developmental process appears to be compromised. Should the bees be exposed to additional stresses such as pests, disease and bad weather then it is likely to increase the rate of development failure."; • Institute of Education The spiralling NHS costs of providing healthcare to over 65s could be reduced if more community music groups were set up, research suggests. The study found that older people who are part of music groups are likely to be happier – and even healthier – than their peers who opt for alternative leisure activities. Previous research has indicated the physical health benefits of music-making and revealed lower mortality rates among those who make music or sing in a choir. Professor Susan Hallam, who led the research, says: "Music can have a really positive impact on mood, which can help reduce depression. The physical activity involved in singing and playing instruments, and the focus and concentration required, can also create a real sense of control and purpose - especially when performances are planned. Participants feel like they are giving something back to the community, and are proud of what they have achieved together."; Would you like your university's research featured on the network? Email claire.shaw@guardian.co.uk with your latest news; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more articles like this direct to your inbox, become a member of the Higher Education Network.
