

Friday 28 February 2014 06.13 EST	DevArt: Google's powerful new move to arts patronage	As large tech firms line up to support digital art projects, are we in danger of limiting the possibilities offered by the form?	In his book ‘The Lost Continent’, Bill Bryson recalls the peculiar hybrid cookery of his grandmother, a woman who actually made the recipes that food manufacturers put on the back of their packets:; This description came to mind last week when Google announced that they would be commissioning and sponsoring a new piece of digital installation art at the Barbican in London. Developers were invited to use their skills for a chance to win a production budget of £25,000 by creating a new art project which - yes – was required to used at least one Google technology, whether languages, toolkits, platforms and APIs.; The commission was, Google announced excitedly, part of a whole new movement in art which they christened ‘DevArt’ – art which was ‘made with code, by developers that push the possibilities of creativity and technology’.; For anyone with any knowledge of art history, this claim comes across as somewhat tin-eared. Computer, or digital, art has been around for over 50 years: in the early 1960s Desmond Paul Henry and A. Michael Noll explored what artistic practices could be engendered through computer programs, and Manfred Mohr ran the first ever computer-generated art show in 1971. But pulling back to the wider history of arts patronage, and the relationship between technology and the arts, highlights that Google’s sponsorship might indeed usher forth a new form of artistic engagement – but not necessarily in the way that’s being presented.; Patronage of the arts has been going on for a very long time, as the legacies of the Catholic and Protestant churches can attest to, and with any form of sponsorship comes issues around power, control, and freedom of expression. At the Royal Academy, the success of artists depended on whether their work would be hung by a committee of ‘Hangmen’ in line of sight of visitors (a process not dissimilar to how products such as breakfast cereal are displayed in supermarkets). As Alice Bell has discussed, the problematic nature of oil and gas companies’ sponsorship of several of London cultural institutions has been held up for debate, not least by activist groups such as Art Not Oil.; Institutional fracture-lines exist between the arts and technology. 55 years after C.P. Snow’s ‘Two Culture’ lecture about the intellectual split between STEM disciplines and the humanities, a gap still remains. As Google’s own Eric Schmidt noted in his 2011 MacTaggart lecture, a major limitation of the UK education system is that ‘both sides seem to denigrate each other.’ Research councils have channeled money into encouraging crossover research through schemes such as the EPSRC’s ‘Communities and Culture+’ network which have given rise to a bunch of fine projects. However, as academics have pointed out, this interdisciplinary is not recognized or rewarded by the Research Excellence Framework whose focus is on the sweet purity of single subject areas.; Economically, there are pretty solid incentives for technology companies to hang out with people from the arts and humanities. Brighton Fuse looked at the composition and competitiveness of creative, digital and information technology (CDIT) firms in Brighton, and found that the businesses that combined creative art and design skills with technological expertise generated new forms of competitive advantage, and were linked to higher levels of economic growth. Nearly half of the founders in this industrial cluster were also graduates in arts, design and humanities, demonstrating that one can both study French lesbian poetry and have a shiny career as a tech CEO (indeed perhaps one should study French lesbian poetry as a requirement before going on to found a company).; Conversely, UK arts organisations have also been exploring ways to engage with technology, particularly around the development of digital practice. The CulturalDigital forum was set up by Chris Unitt to provide a space to explore the overlaps of digital technology, arts, culture and heritage. Initiatives have been launched to help make arts bodies ‘digital by default’, such as the excellent Happenstance project; several culture organisations already focus their work around forms of digital culture, including Lighthouse where I’m currently a resident. Technology companies too are increasingly moving into this space, acting as major supporters of arts institutions and events. Recent corporate sponsors of the Victoria and Albert Museum include Apple, Samsung and Toshiba; and in 2010, Intel partnered with media organization Vice to produce The Creators Project, which commissions original artwork and supporting collaborations between Intel Labs and artists.; At one level, these burgeoning relationships make sense: there are already overlaps between the materials and skills that software companies work with, and those used to develop digital media art; several digital artists began their artistic careers after initially working as professional programmers and engineers. Yet there are large power imbalances between the two areas which have been exacerbated in recent years. Money-wise, UK arts organisations have taken a hammering, subjected to heavy cuts which have left them in a position of financial vulnerability: take a minute to remember that the 2010 Spending Review hacked down the budget of Arts Council England by almost 30%. By contrast, the technology sector is in rosy health, with some companies doing well enough to spend one and a half times the UN’s annual aid budget on buying a single start-up. These inequalities get played out at the urban level in the US, with claims made that the new super-monied class of Silicon Valley employees are edging out San Francisco’s poorer arts community. In education, young people are encouraged to march into STEM training for the sake of their careers and the economy whilst ArtsEmergency has been set up to address the potential drop-off in poorer students taking arts and humanities degrees following the rise in tuition fees.; This is the space that the DevArt project has landed into, yet what makes it novel is not just the power imbalance between Google and its arts partners, but the additional control which the company has over the very infrastructure and materials by which this engagement takes place. (Other sponsors have never really required that the company product be used to make artwork, although a performance by Liberate Tate on the first anniversary of the Deepwater Horizon disaster did involve an activist lying naked in a pool of an ‘oil-like liquid’ for 87 minutes). The final stages of the DevArt competition, and the ICA’s current ArtTalk series – also sponsored by Google – both take place in ‘Google Hangout’, a video chat service. This, as speakers in the ArtTalk session on “The Influence of Technology” pointed out, required them to sign into the space using Google accounts necessitating engagement with the company’s larger digital infrastructure, itself a repository for vast amounts of personal data, in order to participate.; There is also a particular politics in Google’s framing of the domain of software art. Again in the ‘Influence of Technology’ session, artist Paolo Pedercini argued that claiming this as a new artistic movement could be seen as an attempt to steer digital art away from its current practitioners who interrogate aspects of the networked society, and towards a form where it is intrinsically linked with Google itself and aesthetically pleasing installations (no inappropriate, indecent, sexual or profane submissions allowed).; There will always be issues of politics and power between arts institutions and their patrons, and Google has already been the subject of critique from artist-activists: see the Emergent Service Workers’ Party outside the HQ last May Day, or Andrew Norman Wilson’s piece ‘Workers Leaving the Googleplex’ which addresses the company’s labour practices. As the DevArt project indicates, however, there are specific issues around the way that large technology companies inhabit this role which are tied to the materials, tools, and structures that they bring and the means of control. These raise questions about the means of production and the types of cultural output which are permissible and possible under these circumstances. Arts organisations that are hoping to build their digital skills and resilience might do well to also develop literacy in the forms in which this control takes, and how best to address it.; Georgina Voss was awarded her PhD in technology and innovation management from SPRU, University of Sussex, and is currently a Resident at Lighthouse Studios. On Twitter she is @gsvoss