

Tuesday 7 January 2014 16.00 EST	Michael Gove's grand illusion over Oh What a Lovely War		Michael Gove holds up the show Oh What a Lovely War as an example of a leftwing attempt to peddle unpatriotic myths, and the education department's defence of its boss implies that this universally acclaimed show "denigrates the patriotism, humour and courage demonstrated by ordinary British soldiers in the first world war" (Baldrick – Your country needs you, G2, 7 January).; This is a calumny of the work of Joan Littlewood, Gerry Raffles and all those artists in Theatre Workshop who created the show at Theatre Royal Stratford East. The opposite is the truth. A vital part of the show's success lay in the fact that it told the story of the first world war from the point of view of the men in the trenches.; Not long ago the respected playwright Peter Nichols said of its original production in 1963, "Joan Littlewood's masterpiece remains for me the most compelling theatre experience in my life. The supreme tragic event of our century was told with a gaiety that, by using their own songs, showed what spirit had been crushed out of the glorious dead by four years of Vickers guns, poison gas and shells."; As for it being part of a leftwing conspiracy, important source material came from the Tory MP Alan Clark's book, The Donkeys, the title of which came from the phrase describing the soldiers as "lions led by donkeys".; Princess Margaret attended the original production accompanied by Lord Cobbold, who in his capacity as lord chamberlain was in charge of theatrical censorship. While congratulating the cast, Princess Margaret said to the director, "What you said here tonight, Miss Littlewood, should have been said a long time ago", and added, "Don't you agree, Lord Cobbold?" "Yes, ma'am," he replied, and Joan Littlewood made the aside to a nearby cast member, "That's our permission", meaning permission to go ahead with a transfer to the West End, which Lord Cobbold's department was apparently having doubts about without considerable changes.; It seems Mr Gove now wishes to appoint himself the censor of theatre at the heart of the education system. Philip Hedley Co-executor of Joan Littlewood's estate; • It's not as though the originators of Oh What a Lovely War were the first to challenge orthodox accounts. If Mr Gove wants to say anything serious about how the war has been perceived he needs also to consider its treatment in interwar films such as Kameradschaft, La Grande Illusion and All Quiet on the Western Front. All were banned by the Nazis. It's not loyalty to anyone's country that is threatened by such critiques, but the self-assurance of the powerful who seek to hide the truth from the rank and file. Ian Jewesbury London; • Like other readers I very much appreciated Michael Morpurgo's call (A year to honour, but not glorify, the Great War's dead, 2 January). It is not true, however, as he was told, that War Horse is the first play about the war to be performed in Berlin. Sherriff's Journeys End was performed there in 1929, and reviewed by Erich Kästner under the wry title "Gentlemen Prefer Peace". The will to reconciliation existed on both sides at that time. But it is generally fair to say that German writings about the war – by authors as different as Ernst Jünger and Arnold Zweig, as well as Remarque – were read with keener interest in English translation around 1930 than the other way round. David Midgley Professor of German literature and intellectual history, St John's College, Cambridge; • Before the battle lines are drawn along political lines of left and right and "right" and "wrong" ways to teach and commemorate the first world war in the forthcoming centenary period (Gove has gone over the top, says Baldrick, 6 January), ministers would do well to remember that ideas about the way the war is taught in the UK context is based on very little evidence and outdated assumptions.; Precisely in response to this issue, academics from the University of Exeter and Northumbria University are leading an Arts and Humanities Research Council-funded project entitled The First World War in the Classroom: Teaching and the Construction of Cultural Memory. Part of its research base is the first ever national survey into the way the war is taught in English literature and history classes across England. The data, gathered alongside focus groups with teachers from a variety of different locations and school types, is currently being analysed and the results will be released in a final report in late spring 2014 available via the project website ww1intheclassroom.exeter.ac.uk and other peer-reviewed publications.; Initial indications suggest that teachers use Blackadder Goes Forth in a very limited way, often as a comedic window into a more complex and nuanced subject. We would therefore urge hesitancy in jumping to conclusions until more data is available, starting with our survey report and various follow-on projects into how the war is taught that we hope will result from our exploratory research. It is only then that we will be able to have a reasoned and informed discussion about the way the war is taught and how this might be improved. Dr Catriona Pennell University of Exeter, Dr Ann-Marie Einhaus Northumbria University; • My late father, a veteran of the first world war, saw many comrades die beside him. Like many, he didn't want to speak about the war but I watched the "over the top" Blackadder episode with him. There was a long silence, then he said "That is one of the greatest tributes to British soldiers I have ever seen." What emotions, what feelings, what thoughts does Michael Gove wish to censor in us this year so that he can nostalgically wave a few flags? Graham Mollart Farnham, Surrey; • But for the obstructive attitude of the War Office, there would have been more women to honour for their contribution to the British war effort (Letters, 3 January). When the pioneer Scottish woman doctor Elsie Inglis offered her services, she was turned down by the War Office. Undeterred, and with the help of the Scottish Federation of Women's Suffrage Societies, she organised the Scottish Women's Hospitals for Foreign Service, whose offers of help were welcomed by Britain's allies, France and Serbia.; These medical units, staffed entirely by women, saw service in France, Serbia and Russia. Significantly, they were not only staffed by women, but women were in charge – one of whom, Dr Isabel Emslie (who later married my father's cousin), wrote an account of her experience in command of the unit sent to Serbia (With a Woman's Unit in Serbia, Salonika and Sebastopol). In contrast to the attitude of the War Office, Britain's allies recognised the contribution of these amazing women: Elsie Inglis was awarded Serbia's Order of the White Eagle, the highest Serbian honour. She was the first woman to be so honoured. Isabel Emslie was awarded the Croix de Guerre by the French.; Needless to say, after the war, capable doctors like her struggled to have a medical career and were denied kind of the posts of responsibility which they held in wartime. Professor Sarah Hutton Aberystwyth University