Tuesday 26 March 2013 04.30 EDT	South by North-East? Business trips abroad can build global links	Hackney council was criticised for taking 25 businesses to the SXSW festival, but it will create jobs and boost the economy	The headline reads: council spends thousands on foreign holidays while bins overflow. This sums up the usual response to public servants – elected or otherwise – going on a trip abroad. The assumption is that they are on a jolly holiday funded by the taxpayer. The fact that councils are actively encouraging investment in their communities is rarely mentioned, though the prime minister visiting other countries on a trade mission passes with little comment.; Our approach to growth in east London is to use local government and the business community, which is led by SMEs, to generate social and economic prosperity. If this means engaging in foreign travel to expand our reputation and generate trade, so be it.; Earlier this month a team from Hackney council, together with 25 Hackney businesses from the creative arts and technology sectors, travelled to Austin, Texas for the South by Southwest Interactive festival – popularly known as SXSW. This is an established global event bringing more than 250,000 people together from across the arts, sciences and humanities in a programme of exchange, networking, brokerage and trade. It's the Davos equivalent for innovation and tech.; The aim of the trip was to open Hackney House Austin, a 278-sq metres (3,000-sq ft) space showcasing the best in business in east London. The curated programme focused on growing our local economy.; I don't have any qualms about Hackney council's role in this venture. We are supporting collaboration and drawing on local strengths to pursue a set of common objectives, as well as showcasing some of the UK's most exciting businesses. This is what strong local government can excel at.; Hackney House had its first public event last summer in a temporary car park in Shoreditch. More than 40,000 people visited to celebrate all that is thriving in Hackney's creative sectors – from food to fashion, art to apps. It brought creative entrepreneurs face-to-face with the venture capitalists they need to realise their ideas. Hackney House allows businesses to meet and trade. On its return from SXSW, the venture will pop up on a new site in Shoreditch for the summer, starting with the Digital Shoreditch 2013 festival.; Hackney's presence in Austin was the product of local diplomacy in action: the mayor of Austin and the elected mayor of Hackney signed a friendship agreement in the summer of 2012. Both communities recognised the similarities between their respective clusters – small business-led, creative and growing fast. There are a crucial set of objectives that resonate between both communities: supporting local economic growth; creating jobs; promoting investment in communities.; I believe that enabling innovation and enterprise is vital in nurturing a sustainable and growing local economy. Local government is ideally placed to listen and act on the needs of businesses, developing trade and investment relationships, and acting as an ambassador and manager of the urban environment in which business thrives.; By creating jobs – and, crucially, pathways into those jobs for the wider community – a wider set of social outcomes can be realised. Councils can support collaborations that tailor the local vocational and academic curriculum. They can develop apprenticeships and skills development that equips residents to be part of their own local economic growth.; As our communities become increasingly well connected, it is not surprising that local and global boundaries are fast disappearing. Hackney's business links are not only to North America; Berlin and Barcelona are seeking to sign agreements this year to expand trade and productivity between our creative technology clusters.; The opportunity to explore relationships that bring together different markets is compelling. These relationships can help tackle poverty through trade, education and local civic leadership – a very exciting future indeed.; Councillor Guy Nicholson is portfolio holder for regeneration at Hackney council; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the local government network for news, views and the latest job vacancies
