Monday 12 August 2013 08.27 EDT	Prince Philip returns to royal duties two months after surgery	Duke of Edinburgh undertakes first official engagement after undergoing exploratory abdominal surgery in June	The Duke of Edinburgh has undertaken his first official engagement after almost two months of convalescing and said it was a "great pleasure to be back in circulation".; Prince Philip, 92, had not been seen in public since he underwent exploratory abdominal surgery at the London Clinic on 7 June. He was discharged after 11 days, and has been recuperating at Sandringham, the Queen's estate in Norfolk.; He is now joining his wife on her annual summer break at her Scottish estate, Balmoral.; Resuming official engagements, he handed out medals at the Royal Society of Edinburgh (RSE) to the scientists Prof Sir John Cadogan and Prof Michael Ferguson and the retired oil executive Sir Ian Wood.; Royal medals are awarded for life sciences, physical and engineering sciences, humanities and social sciences and business and commerce.; The society said: "All three have made outstanding contributions, Sir John and Prof Ferguson in scientific excellence and Sir Ian for his role in building the Wood Group to be a multibillion-pound international enterprise, as well as his work in broader public life."; The duke has been an honorary fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, of which the Queen is patron, since 1951.; His comments were made in a spontaneous address to the audience in the RSE's Wolfson lecture theatre. He told the gathering he wanted to "add my congratulations to the medal-winners".; The duke added: "It's now quite a long list since I've been doing this. But it's a great pleasure to be back in circulation again."; Referring to the medal-winners, the duke joked: "I wish to God I could understand what they'd been doing!"; He also presented the James Clerk Maxwell award to Profs Richard Muller and Richard White, of the University of California, for their pioneering work in microelectro-mechanical systems technology.; Prof Sir John Arbuthnott, president of the RSE, welcomed Philip's presence at the annual event. He said: "It's wonderful to have him back again. He's been here many times and he's been an honorary fellow for 60 years.; "I think he shows always a great awareness of the work that these medallists have done. He speaks to them about their subjects and is thoroughly interested in what they do. He very much enjoyed his visit. I thought he was very relaxed and under no strain. I thought he was very relaxed indeed."
