Thursday 10 October 2013 12.51 EDT	Research in brief – 10 October 2013	Our weekly round-up aimed at showcasing the latest research across the subject spectrum at UK universities	• Imperial College London Aircraft noise may be linked to higher rates of heart disease and strokes, a study shows. Researchers compared data on aircraft noise with hospital admissions and mortality rates among a population of 3.6 million people living near Heathrow airport. The risks were up to 20% higher in areas with the highest levels of aircraft noise compared to areas with the least noise. Previous research has found links between living in a noisy environment and risk of high blood pressure, but few studies have looked at stroke, heart disease and circulatory disease. Anna Hansell, lead author of the study from the school of public health at Imperial, said: "The exact role that noise exposure may play in ill health is not well established. However, it is plausible that it might be contributing, for example by raising blood pressure or by disturbing people's sleep. The relative importance of daytime and night-time noise also needs to be investigated further." Paul Elliott, professor and senior author of the study, added: "It's worth bearing in mind that there are many other factors that are known to have important influences on an individual's risk of heart disease and stroke , such as diet, smoking, lack of exercise and medical conditions such as raised blood pressure and diabetes. However, our study does raise important questions about the potential role of noise on cardiovascular health, which needs further study"; • Durham University Babies learn how to anticipate touch while in the womb, research shows. Nadja Reissland, the lead author at Durham University, said: "Increased touching of the lower part of the face and mouth in fetuses could be an indicator of brain development necessary for healthy development, including preparedness for social interaction, self-soothing and feeding. What we have observed are sequential events, which show maturation in the development of fetuses, which is the basis for life after birth." Reissland added: "The findings could provide more information about when babies are ready to engage with their environment, especially if born prematurely." The study builds on previous research by Durham and Lancaster into fetal development which showed that unborn babies practise facial expressions in the womb in what is thought to be preparation for communicating after birth.; • University of Cambridge / Nebraska-Lincoln American Civil War poetry that sheds light on a neglected chapter of the era's literary history has been recovered and made freely available online after 150 years. Until now, access to the National Anti-Slavery Standard and the Anglo-African - and the poems they contain - has been limited to microfilm or subscription-only online resources. Academics Rebecca Weir and Elizabeth Lorang found verses by figures previously unknown as poets. Weir said: "This is a story about two newspapers, the people who contributed to them and the people who put them together during a crucial period of the war. The writers who sent poems to the Anglo-African and the National Anti-Slavery Standard used their poetry as a means to express their views and participate in public debate." Lorang added: "The poems were created in part by their publication contexts. Two instances of a poem that share the same words, grammar and syntax printed in two different newspapers aren't necessarily the same text. That's one reason why it's important to think about poems in particular newspapers."; • University of Huddersfield The majority of Ashkenazi Jews are descended from prehistoric European women, research shows. Analysis of DNA samples has shown that on the female line, the Ashkenazim are descended not from the Near East but from southern and western Europe. Martin Richards, professor and co-author of the study, said: "Even though Jewish men may indeed have migrated into Europe from Palestine around 2000 years ago, they seem to have married European women." This seems to have happened first along the Mediterranean, and suggests that, in the early years of the Diaspora, Judaism took in many converts from among the European population, but that they were mainly recruited from among women. Richards added: "The origins of the Ashkenazim is one of the big questions that people have pursued again and again and never really come to a conclusive view."; • Newcastle University Monitoring a dog's mood could provide vital information into the wellbeing of its owner. Researchers used movement sensors to track normal dog behaviour while the animals are both home alone and out-and-about. Nils Hammerla, a behaviour imaging expert, said: "Humans and dogs have lived together in close proximity for thousands of years, which has led to strong emotional and social mutual bonds. A dog's physical and emotional dependence on their owner means that their wellbeing is likely reflect that of their owner and any changes such as the dog being walked less often, perhaps not being fed regularly, or simply demonstrating 'unhappy' behaviour could be an early indicator for families that an older relative needs help." Hammerla added: "This is the first system of its kind which allows us to remotely monitor a dog's behaviour in its natural setting. But beyond this it also presents us with a real opportunity to use man's best friend as a discreet health barometer."; • Royal Holloway Stress is a key factor in causing bee colonies to fail, research finds. Results showed that exposure to pesticides at levels bees encounter in the field, has subtle impacts on individual bees, and can eventually make colonies fail. "One in three mouthfuls of our food depend on bee pollination," said John Bryden, lead author at Royal Holloway. "By understanding the complex way in which colonies fail and die, we've made a crucial step in being able to link bee declines to pesticides and other factors, such as habitat loss and disease which can all contribute to colony failure." He added: "Exposing bees to pesticides is a bit like adding more and more weight on someone's shoulders. A person can keep walking normally under a bit of weight, but when it gets too much – they collapse. Similarly, bee colonies can keep growing when bees aren't too stressed, but if stress levels get too high the colony will eventually fail." Vincent Jansen, co-author, said: "It is intriguing that the way in which bees work together is the key to their success, but could also contribute to their decline and colony failure."; This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Looking for your next university role? Browse Guardian jobs for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
