

Sunday 10 August 2014 13.14 EDT	Dinah Jane Walton obituary		My sister-in law Dinah Jane Walton, who has died aged 59, was an archivist, solicitor and latterly a hypnotherapist who transformed the lives of clients with serious mental health problems.; In 1998, the car in which she was a passenger was hit by police chasing a suspect, and she developed post-traumatic stress disorder. Hypnotherapy proved beneficial and she was inspired to study clinical hypnosis.; Born in Corbridge, Northumberland, the daughter of Harry Walton, a successful businessman, and Vera Atchinson, a talented amateur actor, Dinah grew up in the village of Wylam. The family's comfortable circumstances changed dramatically after Harry's sudden death when Dinah was six.; DJ, as she was known, attended Central high school in Newcastle and read theology at St Hugh's College, Oxford. An atheist, she pinned up a notice in her rooms which read: "I shall take Occam's razor to religion and tear it to shreds."; She worked in Durham as an archivist before studying law at Newcastle Polytechnic (now Northumbria University). DJ completed her articles at Gibson and Co in Hexham, joined the practice of David Grey in Newcastle, and then formed a partnership with Tony Mallen. When that was dissolved, she joined Ward Hadaway. She was hard-working, efficient and patient with clients, staff and trainees.; Following the accident, and her divorce from Les Simms, Dinah felt the need to get away from the north-east. She chose Stow-cum-Quy, a village near Cambridge, bought a picture-book thatched cottage, and threw herself into village and church life, having become a committed Christian.; In spite of her ill health she established a hypnotherapy practice, and achieved a BA in humanities and a diploma in European humanities through the Open University. She travelled widely and spoke rapturously of her experiences in the Middle East and became a staunch supporter of the Palestinian cause.; DJ faced a diagnosis of oral cancer with stoical courage and humour. When the treatment appeared to have been successful, she was overjoyed, and her famous lists grew longer with enthusiastic plans for travel, further study, and quality time with friends and family. Sadly, she developed terminal lung cancer.; She is survived by her brother, Rik, nephew, Joe, and nieces, Cassie and Rosa, and by me. Another brother, Anthony, predeceased her.